Some inquiries about the methodology used to solve K4 were made.


I can not tell anything about the method I am afraid, the method we used is a state secret.


However I can tell you what method was used to make K4.

Jim told the group many years the method he used : matrix writing, there are matrices in Kryptos... the group laughed it off.

He also told the group how many matrices he used : the story of the 3 envelopes, the group did not understand what he meant.


Basically there are 3 matrices :

K4-1 the OBKR part

K4-2 the AZUL part

K4-3 the XCODE part

K4-1 is the product of K4-2 and K4-3 but not always.

In essence you write a letter in one of the matrices, then another in another matrix and look what the result is.

You vary what you write in which matrix to form words and confuse the cryptanalyst.

You are not decoding one message but 3 messages.

one message is plain English sentences XCODE (the clear message)

one message is plain English with a twist, AZUL (the obfuscated message)

one messages is the product of both OKBR )the fun/joke message) but is also used at times to hide stuff like : 

WULF CLY SPY which refers to Markus Wolf of the Foreign Intelligence Department of the Stasi (Secret Police) or you read it as FLUW.


We started at the end of K4 because we are lazy but in hindsight it seems there are at least 2 hints informing you to start at the beginning of K4.

A Turkish gentlemen (sorry, I forgot your name Sir) discovered that QRSOS could point to PARIS/CODEX.

CODEX

Q? .... R


PS ITS AS SIMPLE AS ABC, as simple as from A to Z.

AZ

Then there was the GRU statuette from the Kryptos workshop :

CODES CAN BE DIVIDED

CODES CAN YOU SEE....


CODES


We got one hint right (more or less)

Q
Question and Answer

The letter A encrypts a part of K4 to WAX THE MASS.

without that we would not have taken the AWAX serious.

It looks like Mister David Boak of the NSA is in there too : BOAZ.

Which makes you wonder if this is a lure to make you move K4 right after the DAVIX part?

DAVIX BOAZ


AZUL is a Spanish word and means Blue

Wulf, Lupo,Lubo are not English words.

Don't ask us, ask the rascals that made Kryptos.


To recap :

If I have AZUL which morfs to XCODE and I have AWAX, SKY, EYES then I can make :

BLUE SKY EYES AWAX(1)


then I say : something just smashed through the entropical barrier at Mach 9.



Jim : It is in plain (red dot) sight, look around Berlin for that one.


regards,


TWO


(1) AWACS, is an American airborne early warning and control (AEW&C) aircraft 

also known as the eyes in the sky.

