[[page 1]]
Separating concerns in Jim Sanborn’s Kryptos 
Matt Reid 
Software Engineer 
Watlington, Oxon, United Kingdom 
matzreid888@yahoo.co.uk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
This paper details four discrete layers of 
information within Jim Sanborn’s 1990 
Kryptos sculpture. These layers are shown to  
include 
a 
mathematical 
blueprint 
for 
calculating astronomical calendar cycles, a 
series of static challenge puzzles, two kinetic 
puzzles and finally a novel classical cipher 
type known more widely by its key data as K4.  
The challenge puzzles when solved in order 
will be shown to  act as a guide to discovery 
and isolation of the K4 cipher.  Analysis of the 
K4 cipher type once isolated is presented and 
classified as being ‘Cymatic’ in nature. 
1 
Supporting information and credits 
Much of the contents of this  paper have already 
been published piecemeal over the last 14 years 
by the author to online forums and social media, 
but not formally entered into the academic record 
as a holistic body of work. All results within this 
paper are thought to be the original work of the 
author, but credit is given to James Churchill who 
provided useful information on the topic of 
‘kinetic art’ and further directed attention to a 
significant set of repeating letter groupings in the 
Kryptos cipher text in late 2020.  It would be 
difficult to sensibly condense these findings into a 
concise treatment, so a companion tool written in 
HTML and JavaScript is available alongside this 
paper in order to allow reproduction of the results 
presented. It will be assumed that readers are 
already familiar with Kryptos and the plain text 
(pt) results already decrypted or known to date for 
sections K1, K2, K3 and K4. 
1.1 Introduction 
Despite some 25% of the K4 pt having been 
disclosed by Jim Sanborn since 2010 there 
remains confusion as to what Kryptos is and 
whether or not cryptanalysis can be applied to K4 
as was the case for sections K1-3.  This paper 
looks to separate the various concerns that 
contend for attention in the overall sculpture, so 
that K4 can be fully isolated with a high degree of 
confidence.  It is hoped that isolation of the cipher 
will finally allow for a proper cryptanalysis. To 
achieve the level of isolation required for such an 
analysis, 
four 
frameworks 
that 
exist 
in 
superposition are presented for logical separation.  
Section 2 deals with an ‘implied scheme’ hidden 
via steganography that exposes a mathematical 
blueprint for a number of  well known calculations 
relating to the Solar Lunar cycle.  These cycles are 
in turn shown to be analogous to the functionality 
of the Antikythera Mechanism.  Section 3 details 
a framework predicated on four six letter keys in 
the pt that lay out a trail of challenge puzzles each 
of varying difficulty and significance, that once 
solved in order lead to the identification of 6 
matrices upon which the K4 cipher is predicated 
before K4 per se can be used as a key for pt 
retrieval. Section 4 will show the extraction of 
additional information via a kinetic scheme that 
requires physical interaction with discrete rows of 
Kryptos cipher text (ct).  This kinetic aspect 
further informs understanding of the K4 ciphers 
mechanical aspects and reveals an analogue 
already present in the pt.  Finally, the nature of the 
isolated K4 framework will be shown to be a 
novel form of classical cipher that relies on a 
phenomenon akin to wave interference and as a 
result has been given a classification of being 
‘Cymatic’.   
2 
Analogue Computation of K1 and K2 
Publicly available documents prior to the official 
dedication of Kryptos on November 3rd 1990 
show that Jim Sanborn had already written to 
employees on the CIA campus before the 
installation was complete telling them that parts 

[[page 2]]
of Kryptos would be encoded using a Vigenère 
tableau. Examining the layout of these two tableau 
panels and laying them out in a fixed width font 
shows that all letters fit within a 31 x 28 grid with 
the exception of an additional L that sits alone in 
column 32.  Within this grid an inner 26 x 26 letter  
square from column 2 row 3 to column 27 row 28 
can be formed as a Vigenère table.  Such a table is 
sufficient for the purposes of decrypting K1 and 
K2 using the keywords PALIMPSEST and 
ABSCISSA respectively.  Performing these two 
decryptions using a Vigenère table rather than a 
decryption function running in software means 
the solve is actually being undertaken using a 
basic form of analogue computation.  This point 
appears to have been overlooked to date, but it is 
important as the residual mask left by these two 
decryption 
operations 
contains 
important 
structural information that can be used to unlock 
a discrete layer of Kryptos that has been obscured 
using  steganography.   
2.1 Artefacts post decryption of K1 & K2  
If every letter in the previously defined 26 x 26 
square is shaded to show its utilization in both 
decryption operations, then it will be seen that 
only 160 characters of the 676 available have 
actually been used.  Examining where the 
boundary lies between the top and bottom panels 
it is seen that of the 160 characters used, 132 were 
highlighted in the upper panel and 28 in the lower. 
 
Figure 1: Letters used in the analogue decryption of 
parts K1 and K2. 
2.2 
Effects of 90° right rotation 
Taking the mask generated from these 160 
characters a right hand rotation of 90 degrees can 
be applied, which can then be overlaid on either 
the tableau or ct panels.  Performing either 
operation shows that the width of the mask is in 
fact only 19 characters across, so when laid across 
the ct panels a region is defined that has a bound 
of 19x26 on the left and an unbounded region to 
the right that is 13x28. 
 
Figure 2: 90° right hand rotation of decryption mask 
overlaying the ct panels. 
Post rotation and overlay, the distribution of 
highlighted characters shown above are now 97 in 
the upper panel and 63 in the lower, which are the 
respective lengths of parts K4 and K1. 
2.3 Layout of the top left panel 
The overlay of the decryption mask detailed in 
Figure 2 exposes an underlying numerical canvas 
hidden via steganography that is independent of 
the ct itself and relies solely on the position of the 
3 question mark characters and the presence of 
one additional character that sits alone in the 33rd 
column of row 23.  Attention is initially drawn to 
this scheme by the repeating rows of 19 in the 
rotated decryption mask.  These 3 initial rows of 
19 blocks can be summed to give values of 38 and 
57.  These numbers are the degrees and minutes 
of the northerly coordinates given in the pt of K2.  
Looking at the location of the ? characters in 
relation to these repeating rows of 19 a complete 
numerical description can be derived for all of the 
given coordinates for the sculpture, which are [38, 
57, 6.5] and [77, 8, 44].  Following the coordinate 
blocks the numbers 3, 12 and 7 are defined, which 

[[page 3]]
can be used to approximate the transcendental 
numbers pi and e. The last two numbers in the 
scheme are given as 4 and 48.  The unbounded 
region in green on the right in figure 3 is a 13x28 
grid with an extra character in column 33 row 23 
giving a logical block size of 365 characters.   
 
Figure 3: Steganographic scheme showing the 
coordinates, 5 additional numbers and a 365 block 
calendar. 
2.4 
A numerical blueprint for gearing 
The numbers given for the degrees and minutes of 
the 
K2 
coordinates 
show 
an 
intriguing 
mathematical property, whereby 38, 57, 77 and 8 
all sum to 180.  Remembering that K1 and K2 
were derived by driving the tableau layout with a 
basic analogue algorithm, it can be seen that the 
numerical relationships detailed in figure 3 show 
that 180 blocks of the numerical scheme detailed 
above could be utilized to drive an analogue cycle 
in which the 180 blocks represent angular degrees.  
Traversing this path twice would of course be 
representative of passing through all the degrees 
of a circle.  Given the presence of a calendar block 
on the right hand side of the scheme it is  
reasonable to suggest that the act of passing 
through 360° may well relate to the passing of a 
sidereal day.  If this is a valid interpretation then 
an analogue operation is capable of setting off a 
cursor that continually cycles through the 180 
blocks that originally defined the degrees and 
minutes of the coordinates.  Every time 360 
blocks have been traversed a second cursor can 
then be moved one block forward in the calendar 
section, which gives a basic analogue scheme for 
computing the day of the year with respect to the 
Earth’s rotation.  With regards leap years, it is 
already known that an additional character can be 
added to K2 for the missing X in the pt. Such an 
addition will push out the space (shown as *) in 
row 14 in figure 3 to become a 366th constituent 
of the calendar block.  Note: In order for the 
calendar to accommodate February 29th each leap 
year (in row 14 column 33), the calendar would 
need to begin on August 31st. 
2.5 
Analogue derivation of K3 
If the 180 block scheme is extended to traverse an 
additional 12 blocks corresponding to the number 
6.5 in the numeric scheme shown on row 4, then 
the repeating cycle of 180 will now traverse 192 
blocks before starting again.  This is a noteworthy 
result as the position of the moon when observed 
each day appears to moves 13° east, so every time 
the earth rotates 180° the moon will have appeared 
to have moved 6.5° respectively. Using the 
analogue strategy employed previously for 
tracking the calendar day in 2.4, another cursor 
can be set running in K3 that moves in concert 
with the traversal of the 192 blocks specified 
above.  If the value of the character under the 
cursor in K3 prints every time the cycle repeats 
then is will simultaneously decrypt K3 due to its 
192 character skip period. Simultaneously, the 
same algorithm will also be computing the 
relative motion of the moon in the sky with 
respect to the Earth’s rotation. 
2.6 
Solar lunar cycles. 
The derivation of an algorithm capable of 
showing the lunar cycle in 2.5 draws attention to 
the numbers participating in the coordinate 
scheme as a whole.  Given that 38 + 57 + 6 + 5 + 
77 + 8 + 44 all sum to 235 it can be inferred in 
light of the previous lunar context that this is a 
pointer to the Metonic cycle.  The Metonic cycle 
relates integer numbers of synodic months and 
solar years in the ratio 235:19.  This cycle, whilst 
reasonably accurate can have its precision 
improved by being smoothed over 4 Metonic 
cycles, giving rise to the Callippic super cycle.  
This Callippic cycle is of interest as the first 
three full rows of 19 blocks in the numeric 
scheme would each be capable of storing the 19  

[[page 4]]
years of a single Metonic cycle.  The coordinate 
scheme as a whole has the capacity to track 235 
blocks relating to individual synodic months, 
which allows an analogue algorithm to be 
devised that is capable of tracking 3 historic 
Metonic cycles of 19 years independently of the 
current cycle that can be tracked instead in terms 
of its 235 months.  Such a scheme for recording 
and tracking periods of time hierarchically is also 
seen in Berlin’s “Set Theory Clock”. 
  
2.7  
The Saros Cycle 
 
On inspection it can further be shown that the 
tableau panels also lend themselves to a similar 
steganographic scheme, but with repeating row 
widths of 18 blocks rather than 19.  The calendar 
portion is exposed by virtue of the extra L in 
column 32 and allows for a discrete analogue 
computation of the saros cycle that can be used 
for reasonably accurate eclipse prediction.  This 
algorithm will not be detailed here, but the point 
is made that the presence of two separate 
calendars, one dealing with the Metonic cycle 
and the other dealing with the Saros is also seen 
in the Antikythera mechanism, leading the author 
to conclude that the steganographic scheme is 
intended to provide a blueprint for the complete 
recreation of the Antikythera mechanism.  
 
Figure 4: Steganographic scheme showing the Saros 
calendar embedded in the two tableau panels. 
3 
Challenge Puzzles 
The second discrete layer of Kryptos relates to a 
series of challenge puzzles that once solved in the 
correct order lead to the isolation of distinct rows 
in the ct that have had the K4 cipher scheme 
overlaid as a palimpsest.  These challenge puzzles 
vary in difficulty, but have well defined outputs 
that provide additional information as a reward for 
their solution.  For the purposes of this paper, only 
the challenges relevant to the isolation of K4 will 
be highlighted with the intention of showing them 
solved in the correct order.  In the steganographic 
layer detailed previously the two cipher text 
panels were considered side by side with the two 
tableau panels.  For all relationships discussed 
from here on the two panels of cipher text will 
always be assumed to be side by side with the two 
panels showing the resulting pt in the same  
positions.  The K4 cipher text will remain 
unaltered in both views.  This requirement to 
consider the ct and pt side by side simultaneously 
will now be shown to be key to solving the 4 
following puzzle challenges. 
3.1  
Challenge puzzle 1 
The first logical break in the challenge puzzle 
layer is found by isolation of the cipher and pt 
characters in rows 15-20 between columns 17-23.  
This gives rise to two 7x6 rectangles that are 
shown here simultaneously for the ct and pt, both 
of which occupy the exact same grid position 
within the 32x28 layout.  
 
Figure 5: Challenge Puzzle 1. 
It is seen that the cipher text in row 15 gives an 
incomplete anagram of COEPTIS whereby the S 
is substituted for a B and similarly in the pt an 
incomplete anagram of ANNUIT is given 
whereby the N is substituted for a Y.  Isolating the 
6 letters within the middle of the 7x6 pt rectangle 
reveals an anagram of, “ID ROWS”.  Given the 
misspellings are B and Y, this would appear to be 
a direct reference to the last 8 characters of the 
unmodified K2 pt, which are ID BY ROWS.  It 
would also imply that the phrase was intentional 
rather than an error.  The phrase “ANNUIT 
COEPTIS” is of course taken from the reverse 
side of the Great Seal of the United States.  The 

[[page 5]]
phrase itself is ambiguous in its meaning, but is 
taken to roughly translate from Latin as, 
“Providence favors our undertakings”.  This 
initial result is taken as an indicator that the 
observation is unlikely to be coincidental and as 
evidence that the ct and pt panels should continue 
to be regarded simultaneously as progression is 
made through the remaining challenge puzzles.  
3.2  
Challenge puzzle 2 
Given that a 7x6 section of the K3 ct has 
referenced a result from K2, which sits in the 
panel above it, it is reasonable to examine if there 
is a reciprocal relationship, such as symmetry. 
Reflecting the dimensions of the 7x6 rectangle 
about the 14th and 15th rows gives the result 
detailed in figure 6. 
 
Figure 6: Challenge puzzle 2. 
The letters GRE and FIV are not an anagram in 
the context of this particular challenge, but instead 
are markers of interest within the ct.  Examining 
columns 29-31 on rows 1 and 12 it is found that 
the letters FIV and GRE sit one above the other. 
Further examination of the locale in which GRE 
occurs shows two repeating letter groupings of F, 
RE and V occurring across rows 7-9 and 11-13 as 
shown in figure 7.  It was previously mentioned in 
the introduction that the sculpture contains kinetic 
elements, which will be detailed in section 4, but 
in order to solve this particular challenge it is 
necessary to move row one left by 13 characters 
wrapping on a width of 32 characters.  After 
performing this operation it can be seen from 
figure 7 that the ct now contains 3 repeating 
groups of the letters F, RE and V extending over 
3 rows in each case.  It can additionally be seen 
that the occurrence of this pattern in rows 1-3 also 
contains the additional letters I and G in yellow, 
all of which were in the original FIV GRE 
rectangle. 
 
Figure 7: Repeating letter groups of F, RE and V in the 
horizontal plane after a left shift of 13 in row 1. 
 
In terms of horizontal groupings these are the only 
instances that exist for F, RE and V in the cipher 
text, but expanding the search wider and looking 
for instances of where the letters RE occur in the 
vertical plane over two rows shows an interesting 
phenomenon whereby three additional letter 
groupings can be found in which the F and V 
occurs in the third row with a spacing of 6 
characters in each case.  These 3 groupings are 
found in rows 3-5, 13-15 and rows 24-26, which 
is of additional interest as row 26 falls squarely 
within the area occupied by the K4 cipher.  The 
outputs of challenge puzzle 2 then would appear 
to be the identification of 6 matrices of dimension 
3x32, with 3 expressing their respective markers 
of F, RE and V in the horizontal plane and 3 in the 
vertical. 
3.3  
Challenge puzzle 3 
The results derived here for challenge puzzle 3 
were originally found via brute force computation 
of pt letter frequencies in the regions defined by 
the previously identified 3x32 matrices.  For the 
purposes of this paper the solve will proceed 
instead from information present at the center of 
another rectangle that participates in the same 
scheme starting to emerge from the previous two 
challenges. In keeping with the emerging 
paradigm starting to take shape, another 7x6 
rectangle will be drawn to the left of the one 
previously described in challenge puzzle 2 in rows 
9-14, but this time in columns 8-14. It can be seen 
that this rectangle has at its center another 
anagram that this time spells out the partial 
sentence, “YES ITS”.  This is significant as it will 
be remembered that the entry that proceeds “can 

[[page 6]]
you see anything” in Howard Carter’s diary reads, 
“Yes, it is wonderful”.   
 
Figure 7: Challenge puzzle 3 shown relative to 
challenge puzzle 2 in the pt view. 
Comparing the rows in the pt that contain the 
letters required to make the string “YES ITS” to 
those rows participating in the 6 matrices in the ct 
previously identified, it becomes apparent that 
there is a strong correlation, with only rows 10 and 
27 fulfilling the minimum letter condition, but not 
falling across a 3x32 matrix position.  As a result, 
these 2 rows have been removed from 
consideration in figure 8.  After analysis, it also 
becomes apparent that the letter E, which is shown 
in yellow in figure 8 appears to be participating in 
a rudimentary scheme that allows the 3x32 
matrices to be labelled in a set order.   
 
Figure 8: Simultaneous view of ct and pt showing pt 
rows containing “YES ITS” relative to ct rows marked 
with F, RE and V. 
This scheme is obscured at first glance by two 
factors.  The first is that there are two qualifying 
rows that fall across the top and bottom rows of 
the matrix in rows 11 -13.  As a result of this the 
frequency of the letter E from row 12 that sits 
between them is taken instead.  The second 
obscuration is the word “DESPARATLY” in the 
pt of row 15, which has had one E altered and one 
removed.  If these are reintroduced, then row 15 
now has a frequency count of 5 for the letter E.  
This allows for labelling of each individual matrix 
marked by an F, RE and V with a distinct number 
from 1-6, the results of which can be tabulated as 
follows. 
Matrix Number 
CT Rows 
1 
1 – 3 
2 
7 - 9 
3 
24-26 
4 
11 – 13 
5 
13 - 15 
6 
3 - 5 
Table 1: Ct 3x32 matrices marked post labelling. 
3.4 
Challenge puzzle 4 
There is a final challenge puzzle that completes 
the symmetry of the scheme presented so far and 
fills in the missing 7x6 rectangle that would 
logically create a complete and symmetrical set of 
four.  This is shown in figure 9 and is an anagram 
of “TOMB LR”.   
  
Figure 9: Challenge puzzle 4 shown relative to the  
position of challenge puzzle 1.  
Only two instances of the letters for TOMB exist 
in the pt that have a contiguous grouping and 
which have 3 of those letters in the diagonal.  The 
first of these is already a composite part of the 
anagram given in the rectangle shown in figure 9, 
but the second instance is found in the lower right 
of the bottom panel with respect to the location of 
the first instance, which may account for the LR 
fragment in the initial 6 letters.  If the diagonal 
components of these two groupings are extended 
towards the top panel then they eventually 
converge in the pt view on the letter I.  To put that 
result in the context of challenge puzzle 1, there is 
now an implied instance of a 13 stepped pyramid 
topped by an I. The result already found in 3.1 
would strongly suggest that attention is being 

[[page 7]]
directed towards either the Great Seal of the 
United States or its presence on the US Dollar. 
With this in mind it is found that extending the 
center line of the pyramid in the ct view does in 
fact hit the D of USD in row 1.  As a result, this 
observation is taken as being a key informational 
output of challenge puzzle 4. 
 
Figure 10: Hidden 13 stepped pyramid formed by the 
diagonals of the word TOMB in the upper left and 
lower right. 
Rendering this structure in the ct view also reveals 
that the string ANIT exists along the center line of 
both the ct and the pt views.  The center of the 
structure in both instances also holds the letters 
AET and ATE respectively.   
3.5 
Additional structures 
Taking the letters WW from row 10 in the pt and 
MM from row 4 in the ct it is possible to mark the 
lower left and upper right hand corners of a 7x7 
square that straddles the center line of the pyramid 
structure perfectly. 
 
Figure 11:  Signatures of Jim Sanborn and Ed Scheidt 
shown within the 7x7 box formed in columns 13-19 
and rows 4-10.  The center line of the pyramid structure 
is shown in green. 
The ct view of this structure has at its center the 
initials SJH, which are taken to be the signature 
for, “Herbert James Sanborn” and the pt view has 
a more elaborate scheme as shown in figure 11, 
whereby the surname Scheidt is anagrammed 
twice on the outskirts of the 7x7 square whilst the 
name Edward is given a symmetrical rendition 
within the inner square. 
4 
Kinetic elements 
It was seen previously in section 3 that a left shift 
of 13 was required in order to make sense of 
challenge puzzle 2. Given the ct is laid out in a 
32x28 grid with one extra character sitting in a 
33rd column on row 23 it is possible to wrap the ct 
into a cylinder of width 32 by discarding this 
additional character in row 23, which is deemed 
an innocuous operation for the purposes of this 
section as none of the previously identified 
matrices fall across this row.  The same operation 
can be applied to the tableau panels, which will 
cause the extra letter L in column 32 to be 
discarded and for the panels to be wrapped on a 
width of 31 characters.  This difference in width 
means that the tableau cylinder can actually sit 
comfortably within the dimensions of the ct and 
pt cylinders. Giving freedom of movement for all 
rows about the cylinders axis gives rise to a design 
that is similar to a Jefferson cylinder.  It will be 
noted that the act of moving individual rows to 
observe some kind of intended effect is an 
example of kinetic art, so this section details the 
outcome of such operations as being distinct from 
the static information described previously.    
4.1 
Effects of row shifting 
It will be remembered from the previous section 
that the 3x32 matrix that extended across rows 1-
3 was found as a result of challenge 3 to be 
labelled as matrix #1 and that a left shift of 13 in 
the first row of this same matrix exposed a third 
horizontal grouping of F, RE and V.  This same 
shift also causes row one to begin with the letters 
USD.  This initial configuration for matrix #1 will 
now be used as a starting point to explore the 
properties of matrix 1 under a defined set of 
kinetic operations.  In this initial configuration, it 

[[page 8]]
is seen that a 4 letter block is present in the ct view 
composed of 2 vertically occurring  digrams, 
which are given as “UNYY” as shown in figure 
12.  This string of “UNYY” is deemed to be 
significant as it starts on the U of the USD alluded 
to in challenge 4 and most importantly can be seen 
to encrypt with “OBKR” using the Vigenère 
tableau to give a value of “KRYP”.   
 
Figure 12: Effect of left shifting 13 characters in the ct 
view of matrix 1. 
It follows immediately that there may be benefit 
in scanning matrix #1 for the remaining 3 letters, 
“TOS” that would combine to give a result of 
“KRYPTOS” for the first 7 letters of K4.  
Performing such a scan requires finding the letters 
“CKB” as these will encrypt through the Vigenère 
tableau to give “TOS”.  A left shift of 10 to row 2 
allows for such a result and again results in a block 
of 2 vertically occurring digrams that could be 
taken at this stage to be either “CKBD” or 
“CKBF” due to the double occurrence of the letter 
K in columns 20 and 21. 
  
Figure 13:  Effect on the ct after left shifting row 2 by 
10 characters. 
Perhaps the most intriguing outcome of this 
second operation is, “what has not happened” 
during the movement of row 2.  It can be seen that 
despite row 2 being left shifted 10 characters, the 
initial “UNYY” block has remained invariant 
under the transformation applied.  This property 
of “invariance under transformation” (iut) will be 
seen to occur consistently in specific transforms 
of the 6 matrices previously identified including 
those for which the K4 plain text is already 
known. Further exploration of the matrix 
properties 
after 
these 
previous 
kinetic 
transformations have been applied shows a 
number of other phenomena of importance.  These 
observations are best viewed in the accompanying 
HTML tool, but to recap, all transformations 
applied to the ct are simultaneously applied to the 
pt view.  The first 13 character left shift in the pt 
shows an interesting pattern in which two crosses 
are formed comprised of the letters HOT and EOF 
in columns 2 and 22 respectively as shown in 
figure 14. 
 
Figure 14: Corresponding effect in the pt view of 
matrix when left shifting 13 characters. 
This pattern in the pt is destroyed after the second 
transformation in which row 2 is left shifted 10 
characters, but interestingly a complete 4 letter 
block for the letters “THEO” is now found as a 
transformed quantity.    
 
Figure 14: Transformation of the pt matrix when a left 
shift of 10 is applied to row 2. 
Analyzing which letters remain in proximity 
before 
and 
after 
the 
first 
and 
second 
transformation it is further seen that the letters F 
and I are also implicated when considering the 
before and after case, meaning that an entire 6 
character block has remained invariant.  The 
relevance of this observation will be discussed 
below, but it will now be shown that this 
invariance principle is given a full exposition by 
way of an actual embedded example in the pt. 
4.3 
Invariance under transformation 
It can readily be calculated that the number of 
distinct row combinations for a 3x32 matrix can 
be computed as 32x32x32, giving a total figure of 
32,768 possible row permutations.  Scanning for 
the numbers 3, 2, 7, 6 and 8 in the pt it is found 
that all five numbers occur in proximity within the 
bounds of a 3x32 matrix over rows 12-14.  
Furthermore, they can be re-arranged through row 
shifting to give a visual exposition of the 
invariance phenomena already shown in 4.2. Note 
that these operations are applied to the corrected 
pt matrix containing XLAYERTWO on row 14 
rather than IDBYROWS.  Left shifting rows 12, 
13 and 14 by 3 characters will help keep the 

[[page 9]]
number EIGHT in view during the second 
transformation step.  If row 14 is now right shifted 
13 characters it will be seen in figure 15 that the 
number TWO now sits underneath the numbers 
SIX and SEVEN.  The number THREE will be 
seen in figure 15 to be present in a 5 letter cross in 
column 31.  If row 2 is now right shifted by 7 
characters then the numbers themselves can be 
seen to have remained unaltered, but there have 
been subtle changes to their positions.  Another 
artefact of the transformation is the emergence of 
the letters F, RE and V shown in yellow in figure 
15. 
   
Figure 
15: 
Exposition 
of 
“invariance 
under 
transformation” for the numbers 32768 in the 3x32 
matrix bound by rows 12-14 of the pt.  Effect or a 7 
character right shift of row 2 is shown directly below. 
This kinetic exposition of the iut principle that has 
already seen in matrix #1 is deemed to be 
important as it is reinforcing the idea that a 3x32 
matrix may have two positions that can be 
compared in which the transformation is effected 
solely by a movement of the middle row.  
4.4  
Symmetry operations 
Before arriving at some concrete conclusions as to 
the mechanics of the K4 cipher, some additional 
observations can be made about the previous 
behaviour of matrix #1 under transformation. 
Each row and by extension any 3x32 matrix in the 
ct and pt has a symmetrical opposite, whose row 
can be defined as 29 – n, where n is the row to be 
operated on.  This means that matrices 1-6 all have 
symmetrical counterparts, with the exception of 
matrix 5, which straddles rows 14 and 15 
unevenly and forms an exception case.  Every 
operation is also mirrored in the pt, so 
simultaneous operations across 4 matrices are 
made every time a single row movement is made 
under such a paradigm.  This idea of operating on 
4 matrices simultaneously echoes the setup of the 
initial challenge puzzles in which 4 distinct 7x6 
matrices had to be considered in order to make 
progress.  If the row shifts on matrix 1 made 
previously in 4.2 are mirrored in the pt using a 
counter-symmetric rotation scheme then rows 1-3 
and 26-28 end up with the configuration shown in 
figure 17. The letters ANL are present in both the 
original and mirrored matrix and are shown in red 
with their diagonals extended to show that they 
cross above the letters W and L in row 15.   
 
Figure 17: Inferred ray projected above second 
instance of WL corresponding to the letters YA and R 
in the ct with the position of R shown in yellow as D in 
the pt view. 
The act of joining these two paths for the ANL 
trigram in the original and mirrored matrices 
exposes the presence of a second kinetic scheme 
that is outside the scope of this document to 
explain fully, but the outcome of the operations it 
facilitates once followed through to conclusion 
explain the presence of the raised letters YA and 
R in the ct.  In short, the blue lines in figure 17 are 
taken to be metaphoric of light rays passing 
through focal points defined at the positions of the 
WL characters, which have a separation width of 
16. This means that the 2 instances of WL can 
continually be swapped by rotating the cylinder 
row 180° each time. 
4.5  
The Kryptos alphabet 
A combination of brute force computation and the 
solution to the second kinetic scheme very briefly 

[[page 10]]
described above eventually found that each matrix 
defined in the ct supports an additional 
configuration, which is found by rotating the 
mirrored matrices in a symmetric rather than 
counter symmetric orientation.  This operation 
alone is not enough to mix the digraph statistics 
that are being drawn upon by the cipher scheme 
significantly enough to offer much difference to 
the original matrix configuration, but it is 
reasoned that every time 8 letters have been 
selected from a given matrix the entire ct and pt 
are all moved one position right through the 
Kryptos alphabet.  This combination of difference 
in symmetry operation combined with the 
statistical mixing of the diagram relationships is 
enough to give markedly different results for the 
optimal solutions to the first and second 
configuration positions.  The overall effect of such 
a scheme in which each matrix position supports 
two configurations is that 12 distinct matrices can 
be defined that each result in the output of 8 
letters.  The first configuration for matrix #1 has 
no Kryptos right shift applied to the ct or pt, but 
by the time the 12th matrix configuration is 
reached it will be seen that right shifting has been 
applied 11 times. These 12 matrices each 
outputting 8 letters will of course deliver 96 letters 
of plain text leaving only the final “R” of K4 
unmapped.   
5 
Cymatic behaviour 
In the course of this paper the proposed mechanics 
of the K4 cipher have slowly been built from first 
principles by following guidance from a series of 
static and kinetic challenges that have each 
revealed additional information at each step.  
Using the HTML tool that accompanies this paper 
it can be seen that the scheme outlined generates 
all known pt for K4 in the correct positions, but 
another full paper could be written on what is 
happening in cryptograms 4 and 7 where the full 
plaintext is already known.  Contrasting the 
matrix configurations for cryptograms 4 and 7 it 
is readily apparent that there are two more 
phenomena of interest.  The first is that the 
number of rows being considered for the initial 
position of any matrix configuration will always 
contain a permutation of ABC in the vertical plane 
or diagonal plane, which drastically cuts down the 
initial row permutations that need to be 
considered.  This requirement would appear to 
change after cryptogram 6 at which point the 
requirement becomes XYZ.  The most significant 
observation, which can also be seen in the 
operations already shown for matrix #1 is that all 
4 views participating in any given solution show 
a curious reinforcement of positional information 
relating to digrams that occur in whole blocks of 
4 characters.  The 8 letters for any given solution 
are always extracted from the original matrix 
position in the ct, but the 3 corresponding matrices 
all appear to show a range of different 
relationships to the positions from which these 
characters are extracted from the primary matrix.  
This phenomenon is akin to a form of interference 
occurring between the diagram statistics of each 
matrix view that changes each time the middle 
row is moved by one character in a transformation 
operation.  For that reason it is conjectured that 
the underlying mathematical mechanism of the 
K4 cipher is actually a maximization function of 
some description that defines a starting and 
finishing configuration in which both invariance 
under transformation and positional statistics both 
give weight to whether  a given row 
transformation is indeed the intended finishing  
configuration.        
5.1 
Further research 
 
A candidate solve that satisfies the base 
constraints outlined for the K4 scheme described 
in this paper has already been extracted for 96 
letters that combine with the unmapped R in 
position 97 to give the following result:  
 
KRYPTO SITE AM EAST.  ROUND EAST 
NORTH EAST.  I FORCES.  DYNAMO WAVE 
ROUND GROUP. TE. BERLIN CLOCK. 
CHURCH TUNNEL. UK GCHQ CODE[R]. 
 
This result was achieved via visual inspection, 
but new effort is currently underway to explore 
the roles of automated functions that can keep 
score of maximum and minimum invariance.
 
