[[page 1]]
PETER TOMPKINS 
AND KRYPTOS
Photo © Loren Coleman, Cryptomundo, Jan 2007
A study of shared secrets
Dr Randy Thompson
Version 2.0, May 2010
An APEX Theory Supplemental Report 
1

[[page 2]]
PETER TOMPKINS AND KRYPTOS
A study of shared secrets
Dr Randy Thompson
Version 2.0, May 2010
Introduction
Peter Tompkins passed away in January 2007, about a year and a half after I had ﬁrst learned 
about Kryptos.  That would have been just about the time that I was entertaining the no-
tion that Kryptos was a giant enigma machine, with rotors somehow deﬁned by the plain-
text of the previously solved sections.  Of course that notion led precisely to nowhere, but I 
was determined to never give up trying until Kryptos was solved (most likely not be me, I 
realized).  I was captivated by the Kryptos mystery, enthralled by the sense of secrets and 
challenges, and compelled to “play spy” even if only in the context of a harmless puzzle.
Until the fall of 2009, I was oblivious to Peter Tompkins, and even then I only knew him as 
the author of Secrets of the Great Pyramid,1 a book that I had identiﬁed as having possible 
relevance to Kryptos.2  I purchased the book on Amazon.  It was several months later that I 
decided to look as closely at the author as I did the book, and I was absolutely ﬂoored. 
What I discovered - when I ﬁnally bothered to look - is that Peter Tompkins was a spy.  
And when I say that he was a spy, I’m not talking about some rogue employee in a com-
partmentalized program who decided to become a traitor, a la “Falcon and the Snowman”.  
This man was an honest-to-goodness ﬁeld agent hand-selected by General “Wild Bill” 
Donovan himself to direct the OSS eﬀorts as an undercover agent behind enemy lines in 
Rome during World War II.  Tompkins thereby contributed to the success and future of the 
OSS, which later became the CIA.  (General Donovan has been referred to by some as the 
“father of the CIA”, and his men were known as his “shadow forces”.)
Fascinated by this discovery, I obtained a copy of Tompkins’ book, A Spy in Rome,3 which is 
basically the diary of his espionage operations in Rome.  Picture a James Bond novel, com-
plete with nerve-wracking scenes where Bond is in the company of dangerous enemies who 
don’t know who he is.  Now imagine that the story is written in ﬁrst person, from Bond’s 
point of view.  Next, imagine that Bond does not present himself as superhuman, unafraid, 
and without ﬂaw.  Rather, you feel his emotions, his fears, his insecurities, his losses, and his 
triumphs.  Finally, imagine that it is a true story.   That’s A Spy in Rome.   It is an absolutely 
riveting cloak-and-dagger story, and you should run (don’t walk!) to your computer to order 
this out-of-print book from Amazon, Alibris, or eBay.  
An APEX Theory Supplemental Report 
2

[[page 3]]
This book was published in 1962, around the time that a young Ed Scheidt began working at 
the CIA primarily in operations and ultimately as head of the CIA Cryptographic Center.  
I’d say the odds are fairly good that Scheidt has read Tompkins’ book, although I can’t be 
certain.  Regardless, it is inconceivable to me that Scheidt could possibly have been unaware 
of Tompkins’ exploits as a gatherer, exploiter, and clandestine disseminator of information.
Peter Tompkins was a brave patriot, an accomplished author, a gatherer of information, a 
keeper of secrets, and a master of clandestine operations and communications.  He was the 
very deﬁnition of a “spy”, at a time and place when being caught meant a quick death if you 
were lucky.  By contrast, Kryptos is a game that some people are playing; a kind of brain 
teaser on super steroids.  I am humbled by the comparison between Peter’s sacriﬁces for the 
sake of his country and my sacriﬁces for the sake of entertainment and (perhaps) notoriety.  
I do need to state for the record, however, that around 1972 the works of Peter Tompkins 
seemed to undergo a signiﬁcant transformation from the factual (A Spy in Rome, 1962) and 
the speculative but still balanced (Secrets of the Great Pyramid, 1971) to the philosophical, bi-
zarre, and occult (Secret Life of Plants,4 1973).  Perhaps the immense popularity of the pyramid 
book - combined with other popular 1970’s distractions -  got the better of him.  (I am try-
ing to be diplomatic.)  Regardless of how one feels about the life and works of Peter Tomp-
kins after that transformation, I don’t think it detracts from the hero he was.  Furthermore, 
it doesn’t preclude the possibility that one or more of his books were referenced in the de-
sign of Kryptos.
An APEX Theory Supplemental Report 
3

[[page 4]]
I wish that I had met Peter Tompkins and had a chance to get to know him.  I suppose that 
by reading some of his books, I have at least come into contact with his legacy; I have 
known a shadow of who he was.  I guess that I have Kryptos to thank for that.   
“Secrets” of Peter Tompkins
The following biography, including the image, was extracted from a post by Loren Coleman 
on Cryptomundo, January 24, 2007:5
“Peter Tompkins was born April 19, 1919, in Athens, Georgia, but 
spent much of his childhood in Rome a%er his parents moved there to 
study art. His father was a sculptor; his mother, a painter. Schooled in 
France, Italy and Switzerland, Tompkins returned to the United States 
to attend Harvard Co'ege, but le% early to become a war correspon-
dent for the New York Herald Tribune and NBC.
“In 1941, Tompkins was recruited by “Wild Bi'” Donovan to join the 
U.S. Oﬃce of Strategic Services, the precursor to the CIA. He served 
as deputy to the chief of psychological warfare during the British-
American invasion of north Africa in November 1942, as part of Op-
eration Torch...
“One of the ﬁrst missions of Donovan’s spy organization was Operation Torch, the invasion of North Af-
rica, and Coon worked with Peter Tompkins. Carleton Coon was in charge of Torch and the aﬀair was 
such a success that it insured the future of the OSS. OSS’s leadership, who were later connected to the 
Central Inte'igence Group, then the Central Inte'igence Agency, would never forget Coon for his con-
tributions to the budding American inte'igence community. Tompkins too became linked to spy work for 
several years and was thought of very highly within the OSS... 
“With paramilitary, parachute and secret radio training, Tompkins was sent to Salerno in southwestern 
Italy in 1943 to inﬁltrate agents into enemy territory.  Tompkins spent ﬁve months ﬁling inte'igence by 
secret radio and promoting partisan activities before being transferred to Berlin to spearhead OSS ac-
tivities there. He was OSS Oﬃcer in Charge, Rome Area, and a%er the liberation of Italy moved on to 
spy in France and Germany...
“Tompkins later wrote mainstream magazine articles and numerous books, including The Secret Life of 
Plants, (written with another shadowy ﬁgure, Christopher Bird, with whom he wrote other works), 
Secrets of the Great Pyramid, Mysteries of the Mexican Pyramids, The Magic of Obelisks, A Spy in 
Rome and Italy Betrayed.”
An APEX Theory Supplemental Report 
4

[[page 5]]
Note the list of books at the end of the biography.  Peter Tompkins was a man obsessed with 
secrets, mysteries, and (in later years) hidden forces of nature and other occult and/or new 
age stuﬀ.  (No value judgments here.)  Actually, an important book, Secrets of the Soil,6 is miss-
ing from the above list.  I’ll be mentioning that book again in a later section.  
Meanwhile, let’s consider the book that opened this door of study to me: Secrets of the Great 
Pyramid.  Published in 1971, this book was a huge hit.  In it, Tompkins does a fantastic job of 
providing a comprehensive view of research performed across the centuries regarding the 
Great Pyramid of Cheops.   Detailed facts, measurements, and numerous theories (many of 
them competing) are presented in a way that even a layman can appreciate.  While Tomp-
kins does present some of the more unlikely and arcane beliefs held by others he does not 
strongly endorse them in this book.
An APEX Theory Supplemental Report 
5

[[page 6]]
If the content of this book doesn’t clearly reveal how much research went into it, a brief pe-
rusal of its lengthy bibliography will.  Peter Tompkins went to great lengths to gather infor-
mation for this book.  In 1971, the internet was called “the library”, and it is no mystery 
which library Tompkins preferred for the purpose.  The ﬁrst paragraph of the “Acknow-
ledgements” section of Secrets of the Great Pyramid reads as follows:
“My ﬁrst debt is to the courteous and eﬃcient staﬀ of the Library of Congress, whose in-
stitution - along with those of other helpful librarians around the world - made the re-
search for this book a delight instead of an ordeal;  they are a better and cheaper invest-
ment for our future than more weapons of destruction.”
The “Acknowledgements” section then proceeds to mention numerous individuals that con-
tributed a great deal to Tompkins’ eﬀorts.  So apparently, in the years leading up to 1971, Pe-
ter Tompkins spent a great deal of time at the Library of Congress.  Indeed, it is easy to 
conﬁrm this by Googling the term “Peter Tompkins” “Library of Congress”  with the quotation 
marks included.  Of note, there are these quotes obtained:
“Unlimited access to the stacks of the Library of Congress a'owed me to rewrite, -om 
sources more rational and better informed, a' manner of history, both recent and an-
cient, deliberately distorted by establishmental hacks.”
-Peter Tompkins’ own website at http://www.odeion.org/petertompkins/
“Peter Tompkins' search into this secret world was mostly conducted in the bowels of the 
Library of Congress, where little Ptolemy [Peter’s son] o%en accompanied him. Together 
they trod the underground corridors of power, dividing their time between Capitol Hi' 
and the suburb of Maclean, near the Langley HQ of the CIA, then fu'y engaged in its 
own subterranean activities. Behind those neat lawns and prim letterboxes, secrets 
seethed.”
-Ruth Braden book review of “Secret Life of Parents” by Ptolemy Tompkins 
So in the late 1960’s to early 1970’s, at least, Peter Tompkins enjoyed unlimited access to the 
stacks of the Library of Congress and spent a great deal of time there (otherwise, he was 
near Langley).  Given that he had been granted such privileges, used them extensively, and 
made it his ﬁrst debt to acknowledge the staﬀ, I ﬁnd it most probable that Peter Tompkins 
had at some point made the acquaintance of Herbert J Sanborn Sr, Chief of the Exhibits 
Oﬃce at the Library of Congress, and father of Jim Sanborn.  Perhaps the two were even 
friends at one time, but that is pure speculation.  
An APEX Theory Supplemental Report 
6

[[page 7]]
As I described earlier, Tompkins’ work took a signiﬁcant turn towards the fringe with the 
publication of The Secret Life of Plants in 1973 (with Christopher Bird).  In 1989, Tompkins 
and Bird teamed up again to produce Secrets of the Soil,  a New Age version of organic farming 
(to put it mildly).  Later we’ll delve more deeply into this latter book, but for now I’ll make a 
high level observation:  if you strip away some of the more esoteric layers of these publica-
tions, what remains is an indictment of modern biotech and a philosophical treatment of 
how we can harness nature’s hidden forces to do a better job using our land.  (The speciﬁc 
proposals of how to do so are the controversial aspects.)   That sounds a bit like Jim San-
born’s modus operandi, minus the fringe science, of course.  Here is an interesting quote 
that suggests that Sanborn shares Tompkins’ low opinion of biotech:
“[Adam Lerner, director of the Museum of Contemporary Art] sees a connection be-
tween Sanborn and some of today's artistic activists, who incorporate real science into 
their art to drive home a political point -- about the failings of biotech, maybe, or the 
way we use our land. Yet there's a diﬀerence: Sanborn's work never preaches, it just 
shows.
"What is the comment? You don't know," Lerner says. "That is what makes it so good."”
-Blake Gopnik, Sparking Interest Within the Sphere of Art, Washington Post , Aug 25, 2009
And so we have established potential connections between Peter Tompkins, Ed Scheidt, 
Herbert J Sanborn Sr, and Jim Sanborn himself.  If that’s all I had turned up at this point, I 
wouldn’t have bothered with this report.  But that is not all.  Not nearly.
We are now going to dive into Kryptos itself to see whether there are any connections to 
the works of Peter Tompkins.
“Secrets” of Kryptos
There is an old joke, usually told by aging Physics professors to young Physics students, that 
goes something like this:  
A farmer thinks that his chickens may be i', and he ca's a biologist, a chemist, and a 
physicist to help him get to the bottom of it.  A%er some observation, the biologist says “I 
can te' you for sure that there’s something wrong with the chickens, but I don’t know 
what it is.”   The chemist did some blood work and announced, “I can te' you what in-
fection your chickens have, but I don’t know how they contracted it.”  Meanwhile, the 
Physicist had just been sitting there writing furiously in his notebook.  Suddenly, he 
An APEX Theory Supplemental Report 
7

[[page 8]]
jumped up and shouted, “I have the answer, but it only works for spherical chickens in a 
vacuum!”
Well, I do remember that I thought it was funny when I was the young physics student, but 
I don’t really think it’s that funny now.  The moral of the story is that sometimes, when a 
problem is very complicated, it can help to ignore some of the ﬁner detail and focus on the 
big picture.  The key is knowing what you can ignore and when.  Kryptos is no diﬀerent.  
Considering the sheer number of interesting aspects of the artwork, including the plain text 
deciphered so far, there are so many details that one can easily get overwhelmed if (s)he tries 
to take it all in at once.  For one thing, not everything that seems interesting will ultimately 
be signiﬁcant (and/or useful).  For another, the things that are signiﬁcant and useful may 
have to be interpreted and used in the proper order.
How well I recall the early days of my work on Kryptos:  having new, wild ideas sometimes 
in the middle of the night; thinking “oh my God, that HAS to be it”; lying in bed sleepless, 
suddenly paranoid that someone else has probably had the same idea as me at almost the 
same instant; losing sleep until I ﬁnally got up and tested my theory in order to beat the 
other guy to the punch.  I knew better than to present something like that prior to testing it 
myself, and the quick ideas always failed.  So I was quiet in the Kryptos community for the 
better part of three and a half years.  Patiently listening, I wish I had a dime for every time 
someone in the community opined “K4 is probably really simple, and it will shock us with 
how it was right there under our noses, but nobody thought of it the right way” or “just keep 
turning over every rock”.  
Then slowly, surely, my appraisal of Kryptos changed.  I began to accept that Kryptos might 
require hard work.  I’m not talking “hard” as in “trying a bunch of diﬀerent things until 
something worked and the answer popped out”.  I mean “hard” as in “meticulously going 
through hypotheses and thought experiments, analyzing clues and noticing signs”.  (To mix 
some metaphors, Kryptos is like one of those carnival games that is extremely hard to win 
and yet is designed to seem as if you almost win on any given attempt, thus luring you on.)  I 
began to iteratively ignore some clues in favor of others, making the chicken as spherical as 
it could be and seeing where it got me.  And slowly I made progress, and APEX Theory took 
form.
Note: By the way, even though I came upon the fascinating things presented here while try-
ing to extend APEX Theory, the discoveries are supplementary and independent.  That is, 
they work hand-in-hand with my theory and even advance it, but they also stand on their 
own merits.  So anybody that doesn’t especially like APEX Theory still may ﬁnd these ideas 
attractive.  
An APEX Theory Supplemental Report 
8

[[page 9]]
Anyway, as I said in the introduction, I was oblivious to Peter Tompkins until the Fall of 
2009, and even then I only knew him as the author of Secrets of the Great Pyramid, a book 
that I had identiﬁed as having possible relevance to Kryptos.  Little did I know at the time 
that what I had in my hands was the very heart of the “spherical chicken”.  In other words, I 
strongly believe that various elements of Kryptos (i.e. not just the sculpture itself) contain 
numerous parallels to the works of Peter Tompkins, and that these parallels were inten-
tional.  
Let’s begin with the parallels related to the Great Pyramid:
K R Y P T O S
G R E A T P Y R A M I D
 
• There is a chunk of limestone on the 
ground next to the Kryptos sculpture
• From page 1 of Secrets of the Great Pyramid, 
the Great Pyramid is made of limestone
• “Polished red granite” was also used by 
Sanborn at the CIA (quoting a description 
found at the  CIA website)
• From page 15 of Secrets of the Great Pyramid, 
the “King’s Chamber” of the Great Pyra-
mid was made of “polished red granite”
An APEX Theory Supplemental Report 
9

[[page 10]]
K R Y P T O S
G R E A T P Y R A M I D
• There is a “Khufu-looking-pyramid” struc-
ture in the strata, according to Monet’s 
Kryptos Observations.  (Red circle denotes 
the missing apex.)
• “Khufu” is just another name for “Cheops”, 
the theorized creator of the Great Pyramid
• The Great Pyramid has been missing its 
apex since written records began.  Unfor-
tunately, the oldest records are nowhere 
near as old as the pyramid itself, so 
whether the apex was ever ﬁnished or (if 
so) what happened to it is still a mystery
• Curiously, one of Jim Sanborn’s quotes re-
garding the fourth part of Kryptos says, 
“The ﬁnal part is obviously the, you know, 
the apex of the pyramid there.”
• The plaintext of K3 originates from Car-
ter’s book about King Tut’s Tomb (in an-
cient Egypt)
• K3 and K4 are suggestively paired together 
and apart from the rest, on a subsequent 
Kryptos-related Sanborn piece known as 
“Antipodes”.  This suggests a common 
theme, e.g. ancient Egypt
• Obviously, the Great Pyramid ﬁts the “an-
cient Egypt” theme
• Two other Kryptos materials, petriﬁed 
wood and copper were also found in the 
Great Pyramid
Now let’s consider another Tompkins book entitled Secrets of the Soil, published in 1989 just 
before Sanborn and Scheidt were working out encryption methods for Kryptos.  I became 
interested in this book only because of the possible relationship between its abbreviation 
(SOS) and the similar clue in the Morse Code.  So I searched around on the internet to get 
more information about the various editions of this book.  (Yes, I know that in Morse Code 
"SOS" is a prosign as opposed to an acronym, but in popular culture the distinction has been 
blurred, and I can't say with certainty that Sanborn wouldn't have "gone there" with his 
An APEX Theory Supplemental Report 
10

[[page 11]]
hint.)  Nevertheless, I found some things that made the connection far more compelling.  
First of all, the UK version of the First Edition has a very interesting dust jacket: 
Note that the image contains a cross section of ground, with some plant parts and soil, but 
it also contains a huge "SOS" turned sideways and heading down into the ground.  Not only 
does this seem to be a curious link to the "SOS" in the Morse, but it also resonates well with 
the plaintext snippet from K2, "The information was gathered and transmitted under-
ground."  I always wondered why anyone would "transmit" anything into the ground.  Per-
haps now I know.  Indeed, if one reads the book, there is a chapter that discusses the use of 
electromagnetic energy transmitted into the ground for the purpose of eliminating certain 
An APEX Theory Supplemental Report 
11

[[page 12]]
pests.  Intrigued, I purchased a used copy of Secrets of the Soil from Alibris, and found many 
more parallels to Kryptos:
K R Y P T O S
S E C R E T S O F T H E S O I L
 
• There is a small whirlpool near the foot of 
the Kryptos sculpture, positioned even 
closer to the copper plate than the chunk 
of limestone.  This image was captured 
from a video playing at “The Kryptos Pro-
ject”,  a Kryptos webisite by Jew-Lee Lann
• Secrets of the Soil contains a chapter entitled 
“Vortex of Life” regarding the hidden pow-
ers of vortices.  There is even a section on 
the power of whirlpools.  This image comes 
from page 107, in that section
      
• Regarding the whirlpool at the foot of the 
Kryptos sculpture , Jim Sanborn wrote
“In a sma' pool on the plaza, 
partly surrounded by the copper 
plate, water wi' be turbulent 
and provocative, constantly agi-
tated into standing waves.”
-Jim Sanborn letter to Agency, From Gary 
Phillip’s Realm of Twelve site
• Note the similarity in words used to de-
scribe the whirlpools (bold letters)
• Regarding the power of whirlpools, Peter 
Tompkins wrote
“Flanagan realized the same cos-
mic energies could be captured in 
water undergoing turbulent 
chaotic movement or vortical 
ﬂow and - most important - that 
these energies would remain in 
the water a%er the ﬂow has ceased 
until the water was again agi-
tated violently enough to dis-
rupt them.”
-Peter Tompkins, Secrets of the Soil, Page 108
An APEX Theory Supplemental Report 
12

[[page 13]]
K R Y P T O S
S E C R E T S O F T H E S O I L
• There is a mysterious “Green Blob” sur-
rounded by a copper-colored region “be-
hind” the Kryptos sculpture.  This image 
comes from Monet’s Kryptos Observa-
tions
• The “Green Blob” resembles this black and 
white image (at right) of a copper chloride 
“Chromatograph” of a “biodynamic” mate-
rial known as BD500.  This image was ex-
tracted from the lower right part of a ﬁg-
ure on page 300 of Secrets of the Soil
• The plaintext of K4 is said (by those who 
supposedly have been shown it) to be 
philosophical and abstract
• Sanborn’s artwork typically involves hidden 
natural forces such as magnetism, the Co-
riolis eﬀect, etc.
• Secrets of the Soil would do quite nicely as a 
source for philosophical and abstract mate-
rial, if a book code were used
• Secrets of the Soil is also replete with theo-
ries about hidden natural forces, which are 
part of Sanborn’s typical theme
Finally let’s consider another Tompkins book entitled The Magic of Obelisks,7 published in 
1981.  I mention this one last because I have only recently (May, 2010) discovered surprising 
Kryptos relevance.
An APEX Theory Supplemental Report 
13

[[page 14]]
It is a well known fact that the strata and the pond placed in the courtyard by Sanborn form 
a nearly perfect line with the Kryptos sculpture itself.  Furthermore, according to notes 
taken by Elonka Dunin, Sanborn has conﬁrmed that “the front-entrance pieces were sup-
posed to parallel something in the courtyard, but [he] was surprised and a bit disappointed 
when it appeared that they did not.”  From overhead imagery, it is easily conﬁrmed that the 
front-entrance pieces are nearly parallel with the line formed by the courtyard pieces and 
the Kryptos sculpture.  So one might wonder why Sanborn went to the trouble of forming 
these lines.  We are clearly supposed to take notice, else why form the parallels?  What do 
the lines indicate?  Where are they pointing?  To answer that question, I utilized the linear 
mensuration feature provided by Google Earth.  I started by drawing a line from the center 
of the Kryptos sculpture, through the (approximate) center of the two courtyard strata and 
along the straight edge of the courtyard pool.  Here is a screen capture of that line:
An APEX Theory Supplemental Report 
14

[[page 15]]
Next, I extended the line out across the Washington DC area, like this:
I found it interesting that the line passed through the National Mall, so I stopped there.  
The image below is a close up of where I stopped.  You can see that the line passes perfectly 
through the Washington Monument.  Sure I realize that at such a scale and distance, one 
can take some liberty with regard to where they move the right endpoint without severely 
damaging the linear alignment with the courtyard structures.  If you experiment a bit with 
slight changes of slope, your line can pass through other features at the National Mall, but 
the center of the narrow “cone of uncertainty” passes through the Washington Monument.
An APEX Theory Supplemental Report 
15

[[page 16]]
Knowing that Tompkins had written a book called The Magic of Obelisks, I again went to the 
internet for some information about it.  Here is a picture of the dust jacket:
An APEX Theory Supplemental Report 
16

[[page 17]]
See anything familiar in that image?  Alright, well, a cute correspondence to the Washington 
Monument may not be enough, but the linear alignment between the Kryptos sculpture and 
the courtyard elements is no accident.  I have tried to ﬁnd a good solid review of this book 
on the internet, but the most I can come up with is that it is concerned with Egyptian writ-
ing and (somehow) Free Masonry.  That’s not really much of a surprise, I guess, given the ti-
tle.  I’m also a little chagrined because this ﬁnding smacks a bit too much like the latest Dan 
Brown novel, which is clearly a work of ﬁction.  But I am just following the clues here, and 
even though they are starting to sound a lot like ﬁction, it seems like I must take note.  I 
have ordered this book from Amazon.
Conclusions
This report details numerous potential connections between Peter Tompkins and Kryptos.  
Tompkins was an OSS spy that had an impact on the history of the CIA, wrote an espionage 
book that was most likely known to both Sanborn and Scheidt, and probably had (at least) a 
professional relationship with Jim Sanborn’s father.  Tompkins’ subsequent books contain 
material that is rich with parallels to various elements of Kryptos and quotes by Jim San-
born.  No other treatment that I have seen explains so many Kryptos elements in one sim-
ple coherent thesis:  Kryptos is based upon the literary works of Peter Tompkins.
Perhaps not all of these discoveries are meaningful, but I am inclined to believe that the net 
result is that Kryptos indeed contains references to works by Tompkins.  And as long as we 
are entertaining the notion that such references exist, we might as well wonder why.  When 
asked how many encryption techniques were used in Kryptos, Sanborn responded “maybe 
ﬁve or six”.   Is it a stretch to consider that a book code - one of the most mysterious and 
alluring of the encryption methods - is one of them?  Given that APEX Theory strongly 
suggests that a book code is required, I already have my answer.  But for those of you who 
don’t subscribe to APEX Theory, you could at least consider the ramiﬁcations of these new 
ﬁndings.  Perhaps you can use them as a springboard for your own studies. 
In the next section, I merge this work with APEX Theory to form a plan of action that I 
believe will result in the ﬁnal solution.   Opponents of APEX Theory can tune out now.
An APEX Theory Supplemental Report 
17

[[page 18]]
Addendum:  Connection with APEX Theory
Last summer, I had been working on K4 for about four years, and I presented a multi-step 
process (called “APEX Theory”) which I believe will ultimately lead to the solution.  Rather 
than clutter up this report with the details, I’ll refer you to APEX Theory via this link.
By last fall, I had already concluded that K4 probably employs a book code and that the 
topic might somehow be related to the Great Pyramid of Cheops.  To my initial delight, a 
Google search yielded a treasure trove of results, and my imagination was sparked by each 
and every one.  But eventually, as I saw that the possibilities were far too many to explore in 
a lifetime, my delight changed into dismay.  I realized soon enough that I was highly unlikely 
to ever guess exactly which book I needed for a potential attack, but I consoled myself with 
the fact that it would be fun to learn a little bit more about the topic.  So I obtained a copy 
of Secrets of the Great Pyramid, and I commenced reading.   My selection of that particular 
book was based on several things, including its immense popularity, its vintage (not so old as 
to be out of print and rare, like some of the others that emerged from the Google search, 
but not so new that it is post-Kryptos) and because of the brief description of its subject 
matter, which seemed to be spot-on.  I ﬁgured that these qualities made it an excellent can-
didate for use in a puzzle such as this.  But my selection had nothing to do with the author, 
who I ﬁgured was just some scholarly gentleman who writes intriguing historical books.  So 
imagine my surprise when I discovered that “scholarly gentleman” had been an undercover 
operative for the OSS in World War II, who sent intelligence via secret radio, and who also 
played a critical role in the (pre)history of the CIA, all facts that were most likely known to 
Ed Scheidt.  And I had one of his books in my hands for months, for entirely diﬀerent rea-
sons!  That’s a pretty steep coincidence.  And that coincidence led me to investigate further, 
resulting in the many more coincidences that I have presented here.  Sure, I realize that 
meaningless coincidences are a dime a dozen, but when multiple coincidences emerge from 
one simple premise, that is something that shouldn’t be ignored.
I’m thinking that this Tompkins connection has done two things: it has conﬁrmed that my 
line of reasoning in APEX Theory is fairly close to the mark, and if a book code is really the 
answer then it has also decreased my search space from millions of possible source texts 
down to a manageable number.  I consider conﬁrmation of my reasoning and a signiﬁcant 
reduction in search space to be a major breakthrough, and I have posted that opinion on 
various message boards.
Combining the discoveries presented here with the book code conclusion of APEX Theory, 
I believe that one of the three Tompkins books discussed above (i.e. A Spy in Rome, Secrets 
of the Great Pyramid, or Secrets of the Soil) is possibly the source.  My current favorite is Secrets 
of the Soil because of the presence of “SOS” as the last clue in the Morse Code and because 
An APEX Theory Supplemental Report 
18

[[page 19]]
of the proximity of the whirlpool to the sculpture.  My second favorite is A Spy in Rome be-
cause of the three books it is the most relevant to the CIA and yet is not referenced at all.  
(Perhaps the last challenge is to put all of the pieces together to ﬁnd Tompkins and then 
take the ﬁnal step to relevance.)  The other book, Secrets of the Great Pyramid, is left as the 
least likely candidate due to (1) the location of its reference in the interior of the Morse 
clues rather than at the end, and (2) the relative distance from the sculpture to the elements 
that reference these books (i.e. the whirlpool is closer than the limestone piece).
In APEX Theory, K4 is deconstructed using various clues and signs, and the result is a se-
quence of 48 characters that I refer to as the “APEX Sequence”.  Actually, there are three 
variants of the APEX Sequence that arise from minor variations of a convention used in step 
9.  These variants, with diﬀerences colored in red, are...
APEX 1:
“EBXAJRAAJPPBEHBLDVEPEXXDXOVFXPARFZPEFACAGPEDPRXN”
APEX 2:
“EBLAJRAAJPPBEHBLDVEPEAXDXOVFXPARFZSEFACAGPEDPRXN”
APEX 3:
“EBLAJRAAJPPKEHBMDVEPEAXDXOVFXPARFZSEFACAGPEDPRXN”
To complete the solution of K4, I believe we need to group the characters in pairs or trip-
lets, yielding either 24 or 16 words, respectively, extracted from the appropriate book.  If 
done properly, this may result in a message of the expected length (around 100 characters).  
But a complication arises in that there are numerous ways one could use the APEX se-
quences to index into a book, and it’s possible that another transposition of characters or 
words is also required.  I can conceive of over a hundred possible combinations of steps that 
may still be needed (not to mention the ones I have yet to conceive of) and since I don’t 
have any of these books in digital form, each combination will involve some manual eﬀort.
I now have copies of the potential books, and I am preparing for a focused study in early 
April.  (I usually only have a few hours per month to pursue Kryptos ideas, but upcoming 
events are providing me an opportunity to spend about 9 days of signiﬁcant focus.)   Be-
tween now and the study period, I’ll contemplate the possible existence of more clues in or-
der to constrain the search space.  I will document my ﬁndings and report them sometime 
in April 2010.  Stay tuned.
An APEX Theory Supplemental Report 
19

[[page 20]]
Update:  you are reading version 2 of this report.  As it turns out, I didn’t spend nearly as 
much time working on Kryptos as I had hoped.  However, I did get a chance to try several 
diﬀerent approaches for transforming the APEX sequence (and its variants) into numerical 
pairs and triples.  I had hoped to ﬁnd some unlikely signatures that were suggestive of a 
book code application, but nothing stood out as obvious.  Given my less-than-expected 
study time, I was reluctant to just start trying out random indexing schemes into physical 
books.  So there is no success to report at this time.
Recently, I’ve also been wondering about the possibility that these Tompkins parallels are 
relevant to K5 (i.e. the mystery that comes after the code is cracked).  If it weren’t for the 
fact that the APEX sequence fairly shouts the word “apex”, and that coupled with the RQ? 
is what led me to Tompkins, I would consider whether the curious relationships docu-
mented herein were ONLY relevant to K5 and NOT to K4.  But the coincidence is just too 
mighty to believe that.
Perhaps the Tompkins angle is necessary for both K4 and K5.  After reading “Secrets of the 
Soil” and some of Sanborn’s quotes about his feelings towards the CIA (for instance, that 
they shouldn’t “take things so seriously”) I can see all kinds of interesting connections to the 
rather eccentric beliefs of Peter Tompkins.  And, by the way, I’ll venture one (tongue-in-
cheek) prediction:  The thing that Sanborn buried at Langley will be found just beneath the 
“Green Blob”.  You see, that “green blob” is a representation of the chromatograph of 
BD500, a new age material that is supposed to do wonders for your soil.  And there is only 
one way to make BD500... you make it by ﬁlling up a desiccated cow horn with cow manure, 
and you bury it underground.  
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(1) Tompkins, Peter. “Secrets of the Great Pyramid.”  New York: Harper & Row, 1971.
(2) Thompson, Randy. “The APEX of Kryptos.”  http://www.freeverse.com/apexo)ryptos, 2009.
(3) Tompkins, Peter. “A Spy in Rome.” New York: Simon and Schuster, 1962.
(4) Tompkins, Peter and Bird, Christopher. “The Secret Life of Plants.” New York: Harper & Row, 1973.
(5) Coleman, Loren. “Peter Tompkins Dies.” http://www.cryptomundo.com/cryptozoo-news/tompkins-obit/, 2007.
(6) Tompkins, Peter and Bird, Christopher. “Secrets of the Soil.” London:Viking, 1989.
(7) Tompkins, Peter. “The Magic of Obelisks.” New York: Harper & Row, 1981.
An APEX Theory Supplemental Report 
20
