## word/document.xml
 
 Noting Pieces and Parts 
 The case for Enigma in K4: 
 Drawing parallels between Zygalski Sheets used for Enigma decryption and KRYPTOS/PALIMPSEST. 
 Image #1 – Zylgaski Sheet 
 A ZS is segmented into 4 quarters on an axis, the dots on its surface representing apertures (holes) that light is allowed to shine through. 
 Image #2 – Kryptos 
 Kryptos is represented as a sheet of paper or parchment, also divided into 4 quarters on an axis, and also perforated in a similar manner. 
 Drawing parallels between Enigma decryption and KRYPTOS/ 0362514 . 
 http://www.ams.org/samplings/feature-column/fcarc-enigma 
 http://mathcircle.berkeley.edu/BMC3/perm/node3.html 
 As noted elsewhere, this could be considered a set of permutations, and permutations addressed in cycle notation similar to ordered pairs of the key numbers would be in keeping with Enigma. 
 If “ undergruund ” was not the intended meaning in that it is missing a space, or if it were intentionally granted a double meaning in the mispelling , the entire meaning of the deciphered code changes. Rather than a map, or rather than just a map, it becomes a veiled reference to an Enigma Machine. Note: Gruund is shorthand for Gruundstellung , which refers to the initial setting of rotors on the machine. The machines are electromagnetic, and their real message is transmitted by wires to unknown forms and locations. 
 Possible Rotor settings: 
 U-H-R – German Clock aka Berlin Clock 
 A-B-C/1-2-3 – Palimpsestabscissa (possible ringstellung for the ring settings) 
 R-A-Y- the raised alpha characters on Kryptos 
 L-E-E – Misspellings physically *under” Gruund on Kryptos . 
 Notes: “Parable” of Gifts aka the Three People in a Dark Room. Possible reference to the historical archives. An Enigma Machine is a resident of both the CIA Museum and Peter’s Spy Museum. Given his lengthy tenure, he would know exactly where Zygalski sheets end up, which is likely the Historical Archives of the CIA. Insitutional memory might become a concern to Sanborn here. 
 Notes: Theoretically, using Kryptos as a Zygalski sheet, one could decrypt K4, K1-K3 coming up as mumbo jumbo, by isolating the Rotor Settings in a pencil and paper (and razor) method that the Polish folks did. Alternatively, the 3 letters might be unveiled through K1-K3 in order to facilitate the process if it is done in an orderly K1-K4 approach. 
 Online enigma simulators exist. Reliability unknown. 
 07-19-2016 – New thoughts 
 Notes: p.s. It’s as simple as A-B-C-1-2-3 
 (p ) ost (s) cript = ostcript = cripttos 
 Post skrypt ostkrypt 
 This could suggest that the clue to the settings (or something else) is that it’s as simple as the absolute most basic ring settings with a pairing that’s already in the keywords: 
 P( ost ) S( krypt ): It’s as simple as A-B-C-1-2-3-4-5-6. 
 If all five keywords are incorporated, what other words might fit here? Note the left-over T in the punish Post Skrypt . Keywords: Kryptos , Palimpsest, Abscissa, 0364251 , ??? 
 Alternatively: cripttos are extra letters but yield bum results like tricot and protist 
 D-O-R-E-M-I? 
 