## word/document.xml
 
 Concept: All The S hifts – Raking Light/Ray King’s Light & Palimpsest/ Pentimenti 
 Raking light is a visual technique of viewing a work of art at a angle by degrees or nearly parallel to determine texture and detail. You can see things about an artists brush strokes or the surface on which was worked, or other things discernible to an artist’s eye. One of these things they look for is called “ Pentimenti ”, a phenomenon in which alterations or traces of an original work remain. If that sounds familiar, it should – it’s an artists synonym for “Palimpsest” – the difference being that palimpsest is used for documents and parchments. 
 Ray-King’s Light is a nice play on words that closely follows the apparent theme in Kryptos , specifically the nobility present in the color Purple and rays of light in both the sculpture and Helios mythology. It also neatly ties together a progression similar to the Balloon-Hourglass-Satellite visual markers. Specifially . 
 Helios Hyperion – an actual name of the Greek Titan, god of eyes, rays and watchfulness 
 Helios/ Helius – the Greek personification of the light sun, son of Hyperion 
 Helios Apollo – an actual name of the Greek AND Roman deity, also representing the eyes, light and son. 
 Apollo Vindonnus – a Roman and Celt descendent representing “clear light” and the eyes. 
 Keeping that progression in mind, you could take the mythology that Apollo was the leader of the Muses – who were the daughters of the Titan goddess Mnemosyne and look at the “lucid (clear) memory” clue in the Morse Stones as “ Mnemo’s Signs” 
 Theory : Kryptos , when viewed from angle in K2 to the “survey” marker, may reveal an original image that is not ordinarily noticeable while looking at the sculpture. 
 “Shifts” seem sto mean more than just a columnar transpositional cipher. It could mean: 
 Positional - Simple cryptograms such as null ciphers that act as clues to the greater theme necessary to discover the K4 solution. HYDRA mixed with carbon dioxide from the NDY A HRO sequence is an example. 
 Visual – Markers that show a proper state in which something should be viewed, such as Balloon-Hourglass-Satellite. 
 Progressive – Shifting interpretation of the Visual to indicate the passage of time from one state to the next. 
 Temporal – As above in the Helios naming sequence. 
 And so on. 
 
 