## word/document.xml
 
 Q: How did you decide what message to encode? 
 A:” Well that changed during the course of the project as well. And that developed largely from the reading that I did about the Agency. And also while I was cutting out, physically cutting out the copperplates, things in my own mind changed. I wanted to put something on there which would -- Let's just say, that once the plate is deciphered, I'm not convinced the true meaning will be clear even then. I've made a statement which is straightforward, but that leads to something else. There's another deeper mystery. As you peel off a layer of an onion, the myst -- you get closer to the heart of what it is. And so y'know I just wanted to make it even after it was deciphered, you had to go deeper and decipher something else. It's in English, it's in plain English, it's in text, and you can read it, but that isn't necessarily the whole story. ” ~ Jim Sanborn 
 
 
 The Purple Kryptos Uncial: Theory & Application 
 Theory: Kryptos represents an illuminated manuscript (lighted letters) of the most blatant kind, a Purple Uncial of cryptography-related gospel (good news) according to Thaddeus. This specialized Uncial is like its namesake, fragmented in text, representing only parts of whole messages. The keys to understanding this manuscript (and breaking the codes) are a literal and metaphorical understanding of their relationship with balloons, purple and religion, in such that they represent ritualistic celebration and a freedom of religion that they represent the philosophies of Emile Durkheim in the dich otomy of sacred and profane and his theory of social control. This social control through freedom of religion is Antipodal to soviet thought control, completing a set – Manuscript and Russian text. 
 I’ve built an idea around each of the related keywords, that: 
 K1 
 Balloon: A null cipher provides the clue “T IS AST (Aerostat) BALLOONIST” 
 Purple: The deciphered text relates to the group of 4 PHON Purple Uncials, gospel fragments that due to their PALIMPSEST nature, have a stacked appearance, new vs faded and scraped old an illusion of writing between the void space and subtle shading that writing still exists. 
 K2 
 Balloon: The coordinates of the USGS geodetic survey marker, information that has been provided by surveying balloons, an idea continued by Thaddeus Lowe during the Civil War.. 
 Purple: The ABSCISSA of the artists Color Wheel points to Purple at the 270 th degree. 
 K3 
 Balloon: The site of Carnarvon, that being the Earl of Carnarvon associated with Howard Carter in the deciphered text, is where the world’s first hot air balloon was launched. 
 Purple: 0362514 can be perceived as a 1-0 (computer) switch followed by the six permutations on the sixes and twenties alphabets of the Purple Cipher. 
 K4 
 Speculated: DRAFTYBalloon : The steganographic balloon created by the author, resulting in the AST and KKK configurations of “tethers” and a “CAR” below creates an image that strongly resembles The Red Balloon film’s iconic image. This is important because if we theorize this as a balloon belonging to Thaddeus Lowe, the man was noted for inventing “water gas” which provides a blue flame. A red hot air balloon rising due to the rising hot air rays of a blue flame could be perceived as color mixing resulting in Purple. This is not the reason for speculating DRAFTY. 
 PURPLE CIPHER APPLICATION 
 Sixes and twenties – the vowels and consonants do not necessarily translate to the same for security purposes, and unlike Enigma, CAN encrypt to themselves. Two alphabets, six for vowels, twenty for consonants. 
 The Japanese had a super randomized output plugboard , but typically matched it to their input plugboard . 
 DRAFTYBCEGHIJKLMNOPQSVWXZZ 
 
 
 