[[page 1]]
ABSCISSA Was The Clue For K3
D. K. Sander
dsander17@gmail.com
May 2, 2023
I believe the kryptos alphabet and table on the sculpture was the clue for K1, and the key for K1
was the clue for K2, and the key for K2 was the clue for K3. I will explain the clue for K3.
A cryptanalyst looking at the bottom section of Kryptos for the first time would find that the index
of coincidence (IoC) of the first 336 characters matches the English language. They would
assume a transposition cipher was used, and start looking for clues for the method or route. K2
provided the clue ABSCISSA.
ab·​scis·​sa
1.
the horizontal or x-coordinate of a point in a two-dimensional system of Cartesian
coordinates
The clue is straight forward, abscissa is an x-coordinate or horizontal value. The clue is similar
to a commencement word or blind word like ones used in a Union Route Cipher or Stager
Cipher. They often signify the dimensions of a matrix and or a route to follow. They
communicate a route or value in different ways, either by a predefined list of words and routes,
or by the number of characters the word has. In this case abscissa has 8 characters. This
indicates the value of X is 8. This value seems to be the horizontal step of a skip cipher, which
would also be like the diameter of the rod in a scytale cipher.

[[page 2]]
Let’s assume we haven’t solved K3 yet. A cryptanalyst armed with the magic number 8 and an
assumption that a skip cipher was used would want to place the ciphertext into a matrix where
either the width or height is divisible by 8. This will cause cells with an index divisible by 8 to
align into columns and potentially make a message appear.
Since the ciphertext is an even 336 characters it should completely fill a matrix, without empty
cells, as long as the product of the width and height is 336. The ciphertext for K3 is in a 31x11
matrix on the sculpture which equals 341 cells. That is 5 cells too large. The next size down that
fits the ciphertext, where the product of the width and height is 336, and has either a width or
height divisible by 8, is 24x14. See below.
Now all the cells with an index divisible by 8 on the X axis are aligned into columns and
highlighted in gray. This helps count by 8. But as you see above, reading every 8th character left
to right outputs OOIAUL which is meaningless. At this point we would look to see if the matrix
was rotated by checking 8ths on the Y axis too. On the right side, counting every 8th character
downwards reads SLOWLY. There we have the solution! It is clear that the matrix is rotated 90
degrees clockwise. We can confirm by rotating counterclockwise (as shown on page 1) and
placing it into a matrix with a width divisible by 8 (as shown below).
This proves that K3 is a once rotated skip cipher of value 8 and ABSCISSA was the key.
