[[page 1]]
Note in response to questions about possible Connecticut meetings in K4. Interested parties are also 
referred to the group discussion about this approach from November 2012, etc. 
 
Premise 
(This is what I was told when I joined the group and the reason for the theory in question.) 
The fourth part of Kryptos, K4 (and some say all of the Kryptos screen), is set in a situation where a 
sleeper agent is to be activated after a  lengthy period of dormancy. It is thought likely that the sleeper 
does not remember much about any codes or cipher systems used and therefore needs to be 
"reminded" in such a way that he/she can read the activation instructions, and remember what they 
mean. At the same time the message needs to be reasonably secure vis-a-vis the opposition. It is 
possible that the message includes a methodology used by the KGB during the cold war. 
In such a situation, the activation instruction to the sleeper is nearly always to go to a meeting or 
training session to meet the controller, and be brought up to speed on objectives, current tradecraft and 
communication systems to be used, ciphers, etc. For this, only location(s), date(s) and time(s) are 
needed. So we need to look for things that may mean one or  more coherent locations, dates and times 
in particular, and a possible Russian angle. 
One analysis of K4 then needs to be whether there is any kind of mnemonic link that can accomplish the 
above. It seems clear that the first three messages have no direct bearing on the purpose of activating a 
sleeper agent.  
Out of some possible approaches the following was selected.  
1. The fourth message gives the appearance of being a fragmented conversation between two ham 
radio operators, particularly in the beginning, the end and with some Q-codes in the middle. 
2. On the assumption that this could be a mnemonic approach to jog the operatives memory, further 
investigations into the Ham Radio lingo shows that the Q-code QSS is part of a set of repeating doublets 
BB QQ SS SS ZZ TT which appear with a very regular separation pattern 7 7 10 4 (14) 21. These are also 
both noteworthy mnemonic tools. This series and its singular version B Q SS Z T is looked into. It 
becomes apparent fairly quickly that two parts of the series (SS, and Z) have clear location inferences to 
places in Connecticut by using the same Ham Radio understandings.  The locations work pretty well for 
Soviet spy handlers based at the UN in New York, for example (approx 75-100 personnel). 
SS=Sweepstakes=radio relays run by the ARRL. ARRL is located in Newington, CT.  
Z=Zulu=Greenwich Mean Time. Greenwich is also a city in Connecticut.   
Stringing the separation numbers together in a few different ways also soon shows a potential for being 
dates and times (for example 7/7 @ 14.21, 7/10 @17.31). This is a simple and effective way to activate 

[[page 2]]
the sleeper, who will likely well remember the specific locations to be used in Newington and 
Greenwich. 
This then raises the question of what all the rest is for. Well it is for our challenge and enjoyment, of 
course, but it also works very well as a deception because having been conditioned on Quagmires and 
keyed transposition, the opposition (sigint and CI) continues to think in those terms, and in ever greater 
complexity and never focuses on a very simple mnemonic message which is all that is needed from an 
agent running perspective. I think that is all very nice, but of course I don't know to what extent if any it 
played a part in Kryptos, any more than any other theory. 
  
