[[page 1]]
Finding the Amagiri and PT 109. 
VFPJUDEEHZWETZYVGWHKKQETGFQJNCEGGWHKK?DQMCPFQZDQMMIAGPFXHQRLGTIMVMZJA          
"It was totally invisible hows that possible? They used the earths magnetic field." That is the start of 
Kryptos second message. Some thoughts. 
This could mean many things but clearly involves the use of the earth's magnetic field to make 
something invisible. Ships can be "demagnetized" against magnetic mines, for example, a process known 
as degaussing, or deperming. Perhaps one could say they become "invisible"  to the magnetic mines. 
The text is also a good description of the so-called "Philadelphia Experiment" in which the destroyer USS 
Eldridge (DE-173) supposedly was rendered invisible to the human eye via the use of a combination of 
electromagnetic radiation and gravity. It is widely believed to be a hoax, and contains many interesting 
and detailed sub-stories and conspiracy theories. Now "It", the thing that was invisible, was the 
destroyer. So, is there a destroyer involved in Kryptos? 
A way to look for important correlations in Kryptos is to consider any anomaly.  They have been 
designed to provide important pieces of the puzzle. After some poking around we then notice the 
second word "desparatly" in the upper left hand corner of K3. The word is misspelled, it contains the 
syllable "des" and two "e"s  have disappeared, just like in Eldridge. Intriguing. 
One can then start to look at the Kryptos Ensemble to see if there are any conceptual designs or  trace 
elements of the Eldridge or another destroyer hidden in the art work. In the courtyard there is a pool 
that catches the eye, since one edge is reminiscent of a boat's bow. Further examination shows that on 
the sharp angular edge is a single star. So you have links to a bow, water and the navy (a single star is 
part of all US Navy officer insignia). It's existence between two jagged, tilting and partially submerged 
rock strata gives some further food for thought. Many people of a certain age group have a vague 
recollection of a destroyer cutting a boat in half. A boat called PT-109. 
In the context of a JFK Story, this then becomes a good fit with the collision between the Japanese 
destroyer Amagiri (The Heavenly Mist) and Kennedy's boat PT-109 in which the Japanese ship cut the 
PT-109 into two parts. This can be matched to the phrase in K3 "emerged from the mist", and the dates 
given for the "Philadelphia Experiment" also broadly match. The Amagiri and PT-109 "met" in August, 
1943. The Philadelphia Experiment is supposed to have occurred in the July-October, 1943 time frame. 
The PT-109 event killed some of the crew and was a near death experience for JFK as well, but he 
emerged unscathed. Perhaps this is what is meant by K3s  "emerged from the mist."? 
A little further west, along the walk up to the CIA New Headquarters building, we again encounter two 
sets of tilting, partially submerged, strata. Next to these strata is a flat rock that some call "the arrow 
head". A pointed piece of copper is part of this display, reminiscent also of a boat's bow. The jagged rock 
lines remind of the effects of the collision perhaps. One strata has a compass with two intersecting lines. 
The compass needle looks at a loadstone, perhaps placed to draw attention, at approximately 248-249 
degrees on the dial. Just a little past WSW. This compass direction can be followed from Langley, along 
what is called a rhumb line, at 248 degrees all the way to the Blackett Strait area where the event 
occurred. (With only a fraction of one degree change it also passes through Dallas at 33N 97W.)These 

[[page 2]]
strata are a little more separated from each other, and they are more submerged than the ones in the 
courtyard. Consistent with some passage of time.  Parts of PT-109 did remain floating partially 
submerged for some time. The outer strata sets appear to be relatively well aligned with the courtyard 
"impact" location. The so-called "arrow head" rock, may very well be intended to be just that, or a boats 
bow, or both, but it is also very similar in shape to Naru Island on which the PT-109 crew rested and 
which was very instrumental in their survival and rescue. Here JFK wrote some instructions on a coconut 
shell, including the phrase "POS'IT". Which when read backwards and forwards in now perhaps familiar 
Kryptos style becomes "TI'SOP POS'IT". Compare this with the Morse phrase "T IS YOUR POSITION" in 
the Kryptos Ensemble. Other landscape features appear similar to Olasana island, for example, (just to 
the west of the outside strata) while a major rock in the artist's design display matches Plum Pudding 
Island (Kennedy Island, or Kasolo Island now) which was the crew's first rescue stop. A big thanks to 
Elonka and others for many of the pictures from the website. 
 

[[page 3]]
 
 
 
