[[page 1]]
Gorgons and potential key acquisition in Kryptos and Cyrillic Projector 
1. The Cyrillic Projector key word MEDUSA, [медуза in Russian] is applied to the regular, not keyed, 
alphabet. The keyed equivalent on the теньабв.....alphabet was  йбасгт (jbasgt). Medusa was one of 
three Gorgon monsters. The others were EURYALE and STHENO.                
2. When a KR SO YP methodology is applied to the 4x4 piece of Kryptos K4 "key shape" the 16 letter 
sequence RPORKYSABNSCOBKK appears. 
O B 
K 
R 
K 
S 
S 
O 
B 
N Y 
P 
K 
C 
A R 
   
This is quite interesting and could be some kind of key, PORKYSAB also looks like the start of a keyed 
alphabet. Or perhaps it could mean that PORKYS applied to the regular alphabet AB.... derives a key on a 
keyed tableau, like in the Cyrillic Projector? In British English porkies typically means lies, but it is also 
very noteworthy that PHORKYS, (FORKYS, actually) alternatively sometimes spelled PHORCYS, or FORCYS 
and KETO (CETO) were the parents of the three Gorgons. Medusa's father, PHORKYS, or FORKYS, was 
the god of "hidden dangers of the deep". Maybe he lives in the ponds? 
If the equivalent keyword acquisition analysis applied to the Cyrillic Projector, as described above, is 
applied to the regular KRYPTOS keyed tableau the following occurs: 
F 
O R K 
Y S 
O H L 
D X M 
 
This is of course at least of interest for anyone attempting to follow the "LO trail". At "Extra L", then over 
to VIG O, those letters occur in sequence as well LOH when reading normally. Whether this is a clue with 
meaning beyond identifying the start of a 97 letter string which ends in W at  Panel 4, Row 5, Letter 7 I 
do not know. But it certainly could be another hint at the purpose of that string.  
When the 97 letter sequence starting in Panel 4, Row 2 (letter 1=H, so right after LOH or OHL, depending 
on how you read) and ending with the W in Panel 4, Row 5, Letter 7 is run through the Double 
Transpositions as described elsewhere: 1. First 16 blocks, then VIC CUT with the blocks, 16 to 1, 15 to 2 
etc. until 10 to 7 , then 1 to 8, 2 to 9 until 9 to 16. 2. Tableau 21. 3. Tableau 17. The final three letters in 
the bottom row of Tableau 17 are DXM. 
It seems reasonable to assume that the one-time pad has been correctly constructed. 
Additionally I find it curious that the letters YAR are centered in EURYALE./KR 
 
13 9 
5 1 
15 11 7 3 
14 10 6 2 
16 12 8 4 
P O R K 
Y 
S 
I 
H L 
D X M 

[[page 2]]
 
