[[page 1]]
Kent Ramliden: The Fifty-five Year Journey of Venona Message No: 3/NBF/T1463 
On 28 November 1941 the Soviet Military Intelligence  (GRU) Station in Stockholm, Sweden sent yet one 
more message to Moscow Centre from its astonishingly well informed source known only as "K". This 
time it contained the weekly updates of casualty and related figures in the German units, and their 
Finnish allies, fighting the Red Army on the northern front.  The message was very detailed, obviously 
based on an inside source with very good access, and we can all read  it now because in 1996 the NSA 
released the message to the public as Ref No: 3/NBF/T1463 (T1463),  part of Venona tranche number 
five. It turns out that the message was in all likelihood created a day or two before 11/28/1941, in a 
different place and language, and by the time of the NSA publication, it had been through at least six 
countries, been intercepted at least twice in a minimum of two languages, encrypted twice, once in an 
alphanumeric machine cipher and once in a code superenciphered with one-time pads. It had been 
broken cryptanalytically by two countries (one of which partially) and stolen by a spy working for a third. 
Despite the fact that we now only have the English translation of the final fragmented decryption 
available, it has been possible to reasonably trace the message via research into the various intelligence 
operations launched by Sweden, The Soviet Union and the UK/USA against the original German 
message. Here is the journey of an encrypted message from World War II. 
On June 22, 1941 Germany attacked the Soviet Union, and almost immediately Finland signed on with 
the Germans hoping to take back territory lost to the USSR in the Winter War of 1939-40. Throughout 
the fall of 1941 strenuous, though unsuccessful, efforts were made to break through the Russian lines 
and take control of the strategic railroad running from Murmansk south toward the Russian heartlands, 
on which nearly all Allied relief supplies ran. In charge of the German northern front was Army HQ 
Norway (AOK Norwegen) which made heavy use of Finnish, Norwegian and Swedish telephone lines for 
their communications, and the message in question was part of the normal updates  sent to Berlin HQ 
(OKW).  These HQ-to-HQ messages were encrypted, generally with a high level German cipher machine 
known as the Geheimschreiber, (at Bletchley Park known as Tunny), more complicated than the Enigma. 
The fact that the traffic was travelling on land lines, out of reach of the big Allied intelligence services, 
made the Germans extra sure that their communications through Sweden were secure. They were 
wrong about that.  
Small, but extremely capable, the Swedish Signals Intelligence organization FRA (predecessor)had 
broken the Geheimschreiber already in the summer of 1940 through the efforts of mathematician Arne 
Beurling. This man later got Einstein's old office at Princeton University. FRA had access to everything 
that ran on the telephone lines and much of what flew through the ether. So our message in question 
was generated and encrypted by the Germans in Northern Finland, likely on 27 November 1941. On its 
way south to the German High Command (OKW) in Berlin it was intercepted by the Swedes who 
immediately started decrypting it. By this time their Geheimschreiber decrypting process was so fast 
that they often knew the contents before the Germans. The FRA then used a decidedly low tech report 
distribution approach. They put the decrypts into a secure briefcase where only the FRA and the 
relevant recipient, in this case the Swedish Army HQ, had keys. They then sent the reports by a special 
courier off to deliver the briefcase contents. The Swedes considered this to be an efficient and 
completely secure method of report distribution. They were wrong about that.  

[[page 2]]
 
By 1941 the Soviet GRU had constructed a variety of agent nets targeting the German sea and railroad 
transport and communications arrangements through Sweden, and the key FRA courier, Allan Nyblad, 
worked for the GRU. Source "K" is listed as "Unidentified" in Venona T1463. Perhaps that really was the 
case at the GCHQ or NSA when this Venona message was solved, though that seems hard to believe, or 
perhaps it was just a gesture of some sort. Venona itself leaves little doubt about what kind of source 
"K" was. This fabulous GRU Stockholm source provided reports on a wide range of topics from transport 
shipping, to what is happening in the battlefields of Crimea, to the structure of small Finnish army units 
and what the Finns are building in the town of Kemi, to the German casualty reports by category by unit 
on the Northern front, and confirmation to the Russians that the Swedes were decrypting the messages 
of the Northern Russian fleet, etc., was of course nothing less than a major sigint source. This can be 
reasonably suspected already via an examination of other Venona telegrams from source "K", though a 
key source in Swedish Military HQ might have had the same kind of access in a secondary sense: 
Number 
Date 
Area/Region Covered 
Message Content Summary 
883/41 
25 Aug. 41 
Shipping (Baltic?) 
Re: German transport ships Würzburg and Urundi 
884/41 
25 Aug. 41 
Naval? 
Re: Karlskrona, is either the Swedish Navy base or the 
destroyer J8, also named Karlskrona. 
908/41 
28 Aug. 41 
Denmark-Sweden straits 
Communications Helsingör-Helsingborg and Copenhagen-
Malmö. 
914/41 
29 Aug. 41 
Unknown 
Unclear 
1404/41 
21 Nov. 41 
Kemi, Finnish town in 
Gulf of Bothnia 
Some type of production is being organized by the Finns 
there. 
1456/41 
28 Nov. 41 
Northern front (Polar, 
Salla, etc.) 
Casualty, etc report on German and Finnish Army units in the 
region from front HQ to OKW (German General Staff) in 
Berlin 
1546/41 
10 Dec. 41 
Kerch, Crimea 
Mentions 1 Tank Army 
1564/41 
12 Dec. 41 
Stockholm and Finland 
Sigint./Army deployments. Mentions DF activity against USSR 
northern fleet, Swedes decrypting Russian cipher traffic, and 
provides a list of German divisions in Finland. 
203/42 
30 Jan. 42 
Germany 
A message concerning  OKH the German Army High 
Command. Last message containing "K" (and a link to KARL) 
520/42?¹ 
18 Mar. 42 
Sweden 
Covername KARL in HOSPITAL (=Prison) 
 
Two relatively recent Swedish sources further assist in pinpointing Source "K". A particularly thorough 
review of the case was done by Wilhem Agrell, Professor in Intelligence Studies at Lund University (X). 
He unambiguously concluded that "K" matched the information provided in the interrogation records of 
the  brothers Knut (Code Name EDGAR) and Allan Nyblad (9), one of  whom  was a courier at FRA and 
then obtained a duplicate key that could open the secure FRA briefcases. Bengt Beckman, a former FRA 
official also mentions the Nyblad case. (Y) 
The brothers worked together and took out and photographed the contents in quick 10-15 minute 
working sessions on each courier delivery run. Then they handed over the film to Ivanov who gave it to 
Colonel N.I. Nikitushev of the GRU, cover name AKASTO, usually on the same day. And as quickly as 
possible the GRU encrypted the content in code sheets superencrypted with one-time pads and sent 

[[page 3]]
them off to Moscow via radiotelegraphy. Very likely GRU Headquarters in Khodinka outside Moscow had 
the accounting of German losses not much later than OKW did in Berlin, or Swedish Army HQ in 
Stockholm. The GRU did not even bother breaking "K" up into several cryptonyms to hide the rather 
significant  hints at a major sigint source, that's how secure they considered the one-time pad system. In 
fact, "K" was short for KARL, and it is probably not a coincidence that the courier worked out of an FRA 
building in Stockholm known as "KARLBO" . So they really must have thought this was all completely 
secure. They were wrong about that. 
Late in 1959the NSA and GCHQ were scrounging around  to obtain encrypted Russian messages from the 
1940s that could be tested to see if they contained any of the reused one-time pad indicator numbers 
that would allow more messages to be "put in depth", and more text thus available to create solutions. 
In connection with this it was learned that the Swedes had intercepted quite a large number of Russian 
messages during World War II and kept them. They had also kept the messages sent via the 
radiotelegraphy of the Swedish PTT. So a deal was cut in which the Swedish messages were turned over 
to the GCHQ in return for a promise to get any solved content. Over the next 15 years the GCHQ and the 
NSA labored away on these messages and during some warm summer days in 1962 they managed to 
produce some breakthroughs in messages from 1941, including the 28th of November, that they 
possibly believed the Swedes would find extremely interesting. Evidence of a major sigint leak during 
the war.   
By the time T1463 made its way back to Sweden in the final solved form sometime in the summer of 
1962, it was about twenty years since the men behind the cryptonym "K" had been arrested and 
eventually convicted of the espionage at FRA. Aside from their confessions, and the astonishing range 
and depth of  messages from "K", the very existence of the sources in the Venona "K" material match 
exactly their brief period of activity in 1941, and stops abruptly when the brother who was the courier 
was arrested in January, 1942. Later confirmed by message 520/42 to be "in hospital", GRU code for 
prison. Perhaps you think the arrest was the result of a long, painstaking and occasionally brilliant 
counterintelligence operation? It was not. He was arrested for performing  illegal abortions, one of 
which  went terribly wrong. When the GRU via the other brother tried to recruit a new courier, the 
attempt was reported and the whole thing unraveled during the criminal investigation that followed.  
But the message was back again in Stockholm by mid-1962. Twenty plus years after they first decrypted 
the whole message, in the original German, likely even before the Germans in Berlin, the  FRA got it 
back, fragments of it solved again. This time by the British working from Russian text. By then it had also 
no doubt been to the United States. And that's where it sits now, for all to see. Well traveled. Many 
hours of work dedicated to it. Twice encrypted, twice decrypted. Twice broken by cryptanalysis, and 
once stolen by spies. Translated at least twice and perhaps three times. Not bad for a routine casualty 
message from AOK Norwegen. 
 Venona, as I am sure you know, was an extremely secretive project at first known only to select 
individuals in US and UK sigint and counterintelligence organizations. President Truman was not 
informed and neither was the CIA until 1952. The only other organization that was well informed about 
the project already by 1945 was the KGB. 

[[page 4]]
Background Material/Handout along with presentation at 
 
T1463 below 
USSR Ref. No: 3/NBF/T1463 
Issued: 27/6/1962 
Copy No: 201 
"K's" INFORMATION: REPORT ON CERTAIN GERMAN AND FINNISH FORCES (1941) 
From: STOCKHOLM 
To: MOSCOW 
No: 1456, 1457 28 Nov. 41 
[Two-Part Message Complete] 
[Part 1] To NORTHERN[SEVERNYJ].[i] 
According to information from "K":[ii] 
 
1. [2 groups unrecovered] northern front [1 group unrecovered] AOK NORWAY[ii 
from [1 group unrecovered] to [1 group unrecovered]: 
XXXVI Army Corps[AK] [2 groups unrecovered] no information. 
169 Infantry Division - 13, 3, 48, 185. 
SS "NORD"[iv] - 53, [2 grps. 152, 26. 
unrec.] 
3 Mountain Division - 0, 19, 52, [1 grp. 
unrec.] 
2 Mountain Division - 0, 0, 9, 560. 
[2 groups - [1 grp. 2, 193, 47. 
unrecovered] Division. unrec.] 
163 Infantry Division - [1 grp. 0, 27, 410. 
unrec.] 
6 Finnish Infantry Division - 2, 0, 27, 165,[a 
Finnish Army Corps[AK] ([2 grps. - 135, 0, 614, 961. 
unrecovered]) - 
Distribution [Continued overleaf 2 3/NBF/T1463 
(The first figure [1 group unrecovered] killed, the second missing, the 
third wounded, the fourth sick). 
[63 groups unrecovered] 
([1 group unrecovered]) 124 north of KEMI. 4 
[62 groups unrecovered] 
[Part II] 
[73 groups unrecovered] 
...STER 
[73 groups unrecovered] 
[57 groups unrecoverable] 
No. 471 AKASTO[v] 
Notes: [a] Or : 265 
Comments: [i] NORTHERN : MOSCOW addressee, so far only occurring in 
messages sent in the STOCKHOLM lane. 
[ii] K : Unidentified. 
[iii] AOK NORWAY: German Army Headquarters in NORWAY 
(Armeeoberkommando). 
[iv] SS "NORD" : The name of an SS division in the German Army. 
[v] AKASTO : Probably Col. N.I. NIKITUShEV, Soviet Military 
Attache in STOCKHOLM 1939-1945. 
 
 
