[[page 1]]
ON ENGENDERING AN UNDERSTANDING OF ILLUSION – KRYPTOS, LOCATION, LOCATION, LOCATION 
1 of 2 
The word ‘location’ has the power it seems to immediately engender, on Sanborn’s audience, a notion of spatial proximity, a spot or an area, a 
place, a site, a geographical position, perhaps designated by some coordinates. 
 
I became intrigued by his use of the word during some of his interviews.  The apparent semantic sparring with reporters about requirements 
regarding K4.  Do you have to be at the site to recover the K4 plaintext?  Do you have to be on the grounds of the CIA to solve the riddle?  Yes?  
No?  Maybe?  No comment? 
 
 
Quote 1 : yes. 
 
from Wired.com Magazine Interview with Jim Sanborn, Jan 21, 2005, reporter Kim Zetter 
According to reporter Kim Zetter, “Sculptor Sanborn said the text is a riddle, which requires sleuths to be on the CIA grounds to solve it.” 
 
Wired Magazine Interview with Jim Sanborn, 02:00 AM Jan. 21, 2005 PT 
Zetter goes on to say, the second (section, K2) hints at something buried: “Does Langley know about this?  They should: It’s buried out there 
somewhere.” 
 
Wired Magazine Interview with Jim Sanborn, 09:00 AM Jan. 20, 2005 PT 
Sanborn says, “In part of the code that’s been deciphered, I refer to an act that took place when I was at the agency and a location that’s on the 
ground of the agency.  So in order to find that place, you have to decipher the piece and then go to the agency and find that place.  There are, for 
example, longitude and latitude coordinates on the piece, which refer to locations of the agency.” 
 
Wired: “When you say act, do you mean an act that you did or that happened while you were there?” 
Sanborn: “An act that I could have carried out.  I refer to something I’d done out there.” 
 
Wired: “Something that you did do?” 
Sanborn: “I made reference in the encoded text to something I could have done there.” 
 
Wired Magazine Interview with Jim Sanborn, 02:00 AM Jan. 21, 2005 PT 
According to reporter Kim Zetter, Sanborn may be referring to something he buried on the CIA grounds, though he’s not saying.  The decrypted text 
mentions a burial and gives latitude and longitude coordinates (38 57 6.5 N, 77 8 44 W), which Sanborn said referred to “locations of the agency.”  
The coordinates, slightly altered, appear on the Da Vinci Code book jacket.  Brown made the first number 37 instead of 38; he’s said that he’ll 
reveal the reason in future books.  Some sleuths have determined that the coordinates on the sculpture mark a spot on the CIA grounds about 150 
feet from the sculpture. 
 
B-roll comments, Ed Scheidt New York Times interview, April 21, 2006 
Reporter: “Can Kryptos be solved without seeing it?” 
Ed: “No, it's not just a physical thing. There's more to the puzzle than just the physical properties.” 
Reporter: “Can it be solved by someone just looking at pictures?” 
Ed:  (laughing) “There you go, asking for the answer again.” 
 
 
 
Quote 2 : no. 
 
Wired Magazine Interview with Jim Sanborn, 09:00 AM Jan. 20, 2005 PT 
 
Wired: “Do you have to be on the CIA grounds in order to solve Kryptos?” 
Sanborn: No. 
 
Wired: “So, just by reading the text taken from Kryptos and posted online, you can solve the puzzle?” 
Sanborn: “Well, yeah.  That doesn’t mean that what I’ve said in the piece doesn’t do something physically there at the agency.  So the effect of the 
piece might affect something at the agency so that you’d have to see what I did at the agency.” 
 
 
Wired Magazine Interview with Ed Scheidt, 10:44 AM Jan. 21, 2005 PT 
 
Wired: “Is there anything buried at the site?” 
Scheidt: “I’m not aware of anything being buried, no.” 
 
Wired: “But, within the text that’s already been translated, it does mention something being buried on the grounds of the CIA.” 
Scheidt: Well, the idea of encoding a message is not only to encode the externals of a message the English wording, but the message itself.  Once 
it is readable, it may have other encoding that’s involved in it.  That’s something that would show up in secret messages.  If I wanted to, for instance, 
say that you and I are going to meet at 1 o’clock on Friday.  We may establish a code that 1 o’clock on Friday is equal to “cake.”  So in my message 
I would say how about you and I meeting at a convenient place for cake?  Then you and I really know that cake means the time. 
 
Wired: So someone could translate the actual message but not know what the message means. 
Scheidt: That’s right.  And that’s where the masking and all these other kinds of techniques can come into play. 
 
 
 
Quote 3 : maybe 
 
Sanborn: “Well the new (CIA) building was being built while I was there and at night there were teams that used, I believe, a neutron scan on 
everything that went into the agency so that they could find any bugs or anything that had been planted.  They used ground-penetrating radar and 
various other means to see and find everything that was there.  And I would suppose they did that with my piece as well, which makes it difficult to 
do whatever you’d like to do — not in an espionage way, but whatever you want to do.” 
 
Wired: What do you mean?  Were there things that you wanted to do with the sculpture that you were unable to do? 
Sanborn: “I didn’t say I was unable to do it, I just said it makes things difficult.  When somebody comes in and X-rays everything you do every night, 
it makes it tough doesn’t it? (Laughs)” 

[[page 2]]
ON ENGENDERING AN UNDERSTANDING OF ILLUSION – KRYPTOS, LOCATION, LOCATION, LOCATION 
2 of 2 
 
Wired: So you did something, but they knew about it? 
Sanborn: No, I didn’t say that either. 
 
 
 
Quote 4 : no comment 
 
Excerpt from Wired Magazine Interview with Jim Sanborn  09:00 AM Jan. 20, 2005 PT 
Wired: Is there anything planted on the CIA property that you’ve buried? 
Sanborn: Oh, I won’t say. 
 
 
 
Paradigm shift 
 
At first I just chalked it up to typos, bad reporting or my poor memory.  Why does one need to [go to that location]?  To there acquire the solution? 
 
Then it hit me, instead of simply reading the K2 plaintext (that is, literally), I began to see through it, and the metaphor began to emerge.  The 
conflation of the referent [go to that location] with ‘acquire the solution’ is intentional.  They are one and the same.  The location reference is a 
covert reference to the solution!! 
And bury/underground are covert references to hide from view, to put out of sight, to veil, to conceal, to mask that which is sought – the solution. 
And what better way to mask that which is sought -- given a platform for the science of cryptology -- but to encrypt that which is sought – the 
solution. 
To hide the solution...  To create a hidden solution...  To create, Kryptos. 
 
 
THE INFORMATION WAS GATHERED AND TRANSMITTED UNDERGRUUND TO AN UNKNOWN LOCATION X 
 
THE INFORMATION 
(THE requirements/ingredients to create Kryptos: research, materials, strategy, cryptographic systems, planning) 
WAS GATHERED 
(WAS GATHERED/accumulated/studied/learned) 
AND TRANSMITTED UNDERGRUUND (AND formulated/devised/cast/molded/styled/articulated into a multi-layered riddle), 
TO AN UNKNOWN LOCATION 
(with AN UNKNOWN solution) 
 
 
But how did the appearance of contradiction arise?  Sanborn and Scheidt introduced the confusion on purpose.  Notice that the path of the 
conversation depended on who it was that mouthed the words referencing ‘location’.  If the reporter asked the words, the reading, because he or 
she is not in on the secret was taken literally as ‘the location’ by Sanborn and Scheidt, and their reply reflected this literalness.  This is most evident 
in the interviews in which Sanborn and Scheidt answer ‘no’. .  But when Sanborn or Scheidt mouthed the words ‘location’, they could and did imply 
location as a metaphor, variable or place holder that actually referred to the solution.  In these cases, yes, one needs to be on site or go to that 
location.  That is, yes, one needs to solve the puzzle in order to acquire the solution. 
 
Oh, and yes, one does not literally need to be on site or on the grounds of the CIA to solve the puzzle. 
 
Monet Friedrich 
friedrich@sfu.ca 
 
 
 
 
