[[page 1]]
KRYPTOS 
Hidden Hill Cipher - ​Robert Mereau 
 
Preface: 
This paper is intended to provide support for those working to solve Kryptos. The 
hope is that the content, be it in part or complete, contains novel discoveries and 
mechanics that can assist the greater communities development of new approaches. 
 
Before we begin, there’s a few things I want to highlight. First, I have tried to 
simplify everything into steps that flow from the beginning to the end. In hindsight, some 
steps are more important than others, but rather than omitting steps that may not be 
required, I chose to divide this paper into two parts to help show the logical thinking and 
discovery process I went through. Second, I often use the letters Q and X as wildcards 
because Jim Sanborn does this. Finally and most importantly, the solution does not end 
with a ​simple​ decryption of the final passage. With that in mind, I found a number of clues 
through the entirety of the work which makes me believe this is intended. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

[[page 2]]
 
PART I 
1. Start with Tableau IV. 
a. Map the letters to a color field, and partition until you see the flame of a 
candle. (Mengenlehreuhr - Berlin Clock Clue) 
 
 
 
 

[[page 3]]
 
b. The tableau now has dimensions 14x31. Identify hidden parallel lines (​the 
illusion​)​. 
 
 
c.
 Here we focus on the two vertical lines on the far left side and look for 
scrambled words hidden in between. 
 

[[page 4]]
For the words here and in later parts, I am always going to bring extra attention to ones 
that go with my theory that ​the secrecy of Kryptos is protected by claims made that may 
not be true​. In this case, ​Pill ​and ​Damns​ can both be interpreted in this way according to 
definition. 
d. Go all the way to WW. 
 
Without any wildcards, we get the word Hijacked. Jim Sanborn has been quoted in 
many instances saying he did something to Kryptos that not even the CIA knew about. Did 
he change both the solution and final answer? We also see the words ​Unhelming ​and 
Upgrowth​, which we later see imply that Tableau II (which is above IV) needs to be added. 
 
e. Back to the image of the flame, upon inspection there seems to be two clear 
keys​ at the top and bottom that differ from the subtle shading. There is a 
single 1:1 alphabet transform within the rows, which very nicely turns out to 
be those ​keys​. 

[[page 5]]
 
 
f.
Apply transform from the bottom ​key​ to the top ​key​ as implied by the word 
upgrowth​. Here is what we get. 
 
 
 
 

[[page 6]]
g. Map back to a color spectrum. See the flame flicker. 
 
 
h. Look at the new keywords in the same place as before. (RQ/RY) 
 
 
 
 

[[page 7]]
PART II 
 
2. We are going to do the same thing again, but this time, start by adding Tableau II to 
the top of Tableau IV. We now make a ​tiny breach in the upper left​ ​hand corner​ by 
adding an O to the start of Tableau II. This is necessary to have dimensions 28x31. I 
chose the letter O because it is most like a hole, but I also think a Q makes sense. It 
does not impact the invertible matrices used later. 
 
 
a. Great Pyramid of Giza 
After color mapping you get what looks a lot like the Great Pyramid of Giza, 
which is fitting with the Egyptian theme. Pyramids are also often used to symbolize 
mysteries and secrets. King Tut was not buried in a pyramid, and certainly not this 
one. The Great Pyramid of Giza is however, perhaps the most mysterious pyramid 
of all. Referred to as the ​holiest of holies, ​the name of the King whom it was 
dedicated to has been lost and is now referred to as ​the name which only wise men 
know.​ Many attribute the pyramid to the ​holy grail​. We will see this theme repeat 
again and again as we continue. 

[[page 8]]
 
b. Apply the ​key​ transform to the giza tablet. The word ​wonder​ now appears 
going through the appex. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

[[page 9]]
c.
Let’s do a check to see what evidence there is that we are correct so far. 
 
Common with Vigenere solutions in previous parts, we see Kryptos still remains 
along the edges. It also lines up nicely with our WW which is promising because ​only WW 
knows. 
 
d. Use the Morse clues (RQ/RY & SOS) 
 

[[page 10]]
Using the clues from the Morse code component along with the location of WW, 
we see something spectacular happens. We have a candle in a dark and misty room. 
 
e. Look at the spectacular finesse by which these letters align. 
 
Note that words ​Mist, Morse ​and ​Room​ are all in the correct order, and in the center 
you can make the words ​Glim​ and ​Gloom​. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

[[page 11]]
f.
Words hidden inside - connection to King Tut’s Tomb 
 
The words here are not as important as the alignment (which signals the 
transformation is correct), but to me they paint a picture of an eerie entrance to a tomb 
only lit by the candle we hold, where the ghost of King Tut reigns over the underworld. 
The ancient Egyptian society was a death oriented culture after all and believed not only 
in Gods of the underworld, but that the entrance to the underworld (Duat) was a tomb of 
the deceased. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

[[page 12]]
3. With evidence we are in the right place, we make a breach again in the upper left 
and find a hole to place a candle.  
 
One of the many things I find brilliant about Kryptos is its versatility, reusability 
and reinterpretation of clues. This is the ​palimpsest​ phenomenon. Clues like​ WW, RQ, RY 
and ​do you see anything Q​ always seem to come together with such force that it seems the 
artist makes sure you know when you are lost and when you have found something. In the 
case above, the corners of the square formed by parallel lines are Qs, and I detected them 
first before finding the candle or lines. We also can see all the letters for ​room​, ​gloom, light 
and ​Lester Hill​ - who is the creator of the Hill Cipher which we will soon use.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

[[page 13]]
a. We now search the room. This letter matrix is conveniently symmetric, so 
we only need to check the rows. 
 
There are two groups of words that stick out to me here. The first is ​Toyer​ and ​Roil​, 
as they again go with the theme that something more secretive is going on behind the 
scenes. Though they may be 4-5 letter words which statistically are easy to make, they do 
appear in the ​apex of the pyramid​ which I imagine was highly calculated by the artist. The 
second group of words is ​Storey, Horsey​ and ​Girl​. To me, these are the perfect words used 
to describe King Tut’s tomb. His death was attributed to a ​horse​; he was buried in a​ girl’s 
tomb; his tomb was a single ​storey​. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

[[page 14]]
b. Widen the hole a little. 
 
The parallel lines continue further than the inside square, and if you account for the 
use of Xs as wildcards, the lines can be thought to continue further. 
 
c.
Details of the room are clear 
 

[[page 15]]
Taking a look at Row 2, we see the original keyword ​TEYSROGHIJLM​, but this time 
it starts at ​W ​and ends at ​L (WTEYSROGHIJL)​. The words we find inside have taken on a 
whole new significance. To me, it paints a picture of a shimmering grail that sparkles with 
divinity, and the light it shines is awesomely more powerful than the candle we hold. 
 
 
d. Now it is time to use Mr. Lester Hill’s cipher. You need an invertible matrix, 
and sure enough, there is one in the room. We will refer to this matrix below 
as the “​Hill Cipher​” matrix 
 
Is it not a thing of wonder to have Lester Hill with a lit candle in the dark room with 
us? It is wonderful. This is the invertible matrix we soon use to decrypt the ​unsolved 
Kryptos code​ in next steps, but before we do, I need to explain why this is my favorite part. 
 
Kryptos is amazingly powerful, and to me, it is arguably one of the most powerful 
cryptographic tools on the planet. This is because the matrix above is not the only 
invertible matrix - there are in fact 143 invertible 7x7 invertible matrices, 6 invertible 
14x14 matrices and hundreds of other sizes. When you take into account linear 
combinations and recursive ​key​ transforms, the total number of available ciphers is not 
computable. Again, note that the ​invertible matrix used in this solution is the one hidden 
in the apex of the pyramid​. You can also see that the J in the first column looks like a 
backwards L, so the word Hill is almost explicitly written. 
 

[[page 16]]
4. Decode Passage 
 
Recall when we merged the tableaus, we were required to insert an O to make the 
dimensions work. The same idea applies here. We have a 7x7 invertible matrix and the 
unsolved code​ has 97 characters which is not divisible by 7. Conveniently the character 
before the code begins is a question mark, so I interpret this as our missing piece. We 
therefore insert a ​hole ​in the upper left hand side again, and apply the Hill cipher using our 
matrix. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

[[page 17]]
a. This is the code after decryption. For consistency, we can refer to this as the 
true ​candle​. 
 
 
First, take a look at the words that appear verbatim. ​Light ​is perhaps the best word 
to have hoped for considering the theme so far. We also have the words ​You​ and ​Wax​ align 
with ​WW​, and a phonetic spelling of Lotto which implies a prize​ (maybe the latter is a stretch 
but never underestimate the creators!). ​Visually we can imagine a person (YOU) holding a lit 
candle. Now take a look at the words discovered. It appears the grail is almost close 
enough to grab.  
 
Something also worth mentioning is the importance of the words ​Wight, Aeon ​and 
Eon. ​I chose a less-used definition of Aeon because it fits very well in the spectrum, but 
commonly Aeon means the same thing as Eon - which is a long period of time. This was a 
big deal, because part of the final clue I felt lacked evidence was ​slowly desperately slowly​. 
There are also some three letter words and acronyms that appear in L shapes. The word 
job​ for instance. 
 
 
 
 
 

[[page 18]]
b. Place ​candle ​in the top left hand corner - apply modular alphabetic 
arithmetic. 
 
I have kept the enclosed portions of letters exactly where they were in the 
previous step. At first glance only one word appears verbatim, which is ​Dig​. It may seem 
underwhelming but this word is very special. Kryptos artist Jim Sanborn has said that in 
order to solve Kryptos you have to dig. Dig also appears verbatim in the ​unsolved code; 
another indicator of its significance. Anecdotally, I can say that in the process of working 
on Kryptos I have looked at over a thousand matrices of letters assuming ​Dig ​will be easy 
to find (it is a three letter word), but the reality is that it is astonishingly rare. I only found 
it in two defensible places; the second being a symmetric component of the transformed 
tableau used here. 
 
One other peculiar component is what happens to the words ​Light​ and ​You​. ​Light 
transformed into a sleuth of the word ​psst​. As for ​You​ - have you ever seen when someone 
writes the letter ​i​ with a big bubble at the top rather than a dot? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

[[page 19]]
c.
Reshape from a 7x14 to 14x7 matrix. This step is hinted at earlier on by the 
extended parallel lines in the upper left. 
 
A few cases of palimpsest really stick out. First, we see our RQ/RY reappear. Below 
that has the word ​key​ wrapped around a Q. We also see a square form between the Qs and 
O on the top and bottom rows, and as the two have been interchangeable in earlier steps, 
it looks like a square of Qs.  The word dig is also unaffected. Looking in the cusp of the 
RQ/RY there is a 12 character list of letters with no wildcards, which makes the word 
Accompanies​. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

[[page 20]]
5. The next step is to decide what ​ENOPCAMCAPIS​ is meant to ​accompany​. Going back 
to one of the early instances of RQ/RY, recall that we had found the word decrypts. 
We can also apply this to places where the word Kryptos is still visible, as this 
seems like an elegant spot to conclude. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

[[page 21]]
a. Apply modular alphabetic addition using ​ENOPCAMCAPIS​ to each part. 
 
b. New codes appear 
 
 
 
 
 

[[page 22]]
c.
Discover words inside 
 
 
Going back to the idea that Kryptos may consist of misclaims made to achieve 
greater secrecy; I find this final step supports my theory. Most of the words here are 
relatively self-explanatory but the ones I want to focus on are ​Vizard ​and​ Wizard​. ​Vizard 
implies that a mask has been used, and there have been several quotes from Jim Sanborn 
stating that he “masked the English language”. ​Wizard ​is, in my opinion, one of the best 
concluding words to my interpretation of Kryptos. Recall the relationship to the Great 
Pyramid of Giza and ​the name which only wise men know​. And last but not least - the very 
final clue to Kryptos ends with the question - ​Do you see anything?​ This quote is taken from 
a historical account of the discovery of King Tut’s tomb, where the reply was ​“it is 
wonderful”​. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

[[page 23]]
Additional: 
1. Caesar cipher 
I want to include this additional component, which is not part of the solution but is 
something I found the first day I worked on Kryptos. Using only tableau IV, it is clear that 
the top two rows share an identical key, so a 1:1 mapping is easy. I learned that this is 
commonly known as a Caesar cipher and he liked to use the number 3. I applied this to 
tableau IV and found: 
 
I discovered other words hidden as well, but that is not the focus of this paper. 
 
 
