[[page 1]]
THE STORY OF THE NEW CLUE 
 
Jim said: “Just recently, I gave out a surreptitious new clue that I didn't 
tell anybody about, but I'm sure you know about that. I kind of gave it out 
as a pandemic bonus just to keep people busy out there. I was surprised. I 
first leaked it to one guy in the Outback of Australia and somebody else in 
South Asia. But it took months, it took four months for that to come out, 
to, to reach the KRYPTOS community. 
 
And I had debated that layout. I had debated quite a while, whether I was 
going to release Northeast or East Northeast, and I decided to just release 
Northeast first. I made the layout the same time for the two, and then I 
released the first one and then I released the second ones, you know, just 
as a surreptitious kind of thing.” 
 
I said, “There are theories out there that ‘East’ is just part of the word 
that it's really like least or beast or yeast. Maybe it's a recipe.” 
 
Jim replied: “Well, that's great. I mean, whatever, whatever comes out of 
it, that's great, but it is an ever-decreasing thing to crack. And I also 
figured that the more spaces I've filled in and there will not be any more 
clues, but the more spaces I've filled in, the more inclined people will be 
to guess. To guess a string of characters is, is totally impossible, but 
to guess a shorter string, like before East and then center section, the 
people could guess those parts of it.” 
 
I said, “But that is it. No more clues. That’s the end.” 
 
Jim said: “Right.” 
 
 
THE CARVING OF THE LETTERS 
 
Jim said he initially wanted to cut out the letters on the screen with a 
water jet. But the water jet company was charging too much money. 
 
“So, basically, I went through, I think, fifteen different assistants, nine 
hundred jigsaw blades and twelve Bosch jigsaws and cut it by hand over two 
and a half years.” 
 
I said, “My heart goes out to the fifteen assistants.” 
 
Jim said, “One guy was just out of drug rehab, and for some reason he found 
peace cutting the letters out. So he did a huge amount of it all by 
himself.” 
 

[[page 2]]
WHAT HAS CHANGED ABOUT KRYPTOS SINCE IT WAS INSTALLED 
 
Jim said his last visit to KRYPTOS was probably 12 years ago. 
 
I asked him if anything had changed. He said, “Only that there were tree 
frogs living in the petrified tree.” I said, “Are the frogs part of the 
code?” He chuckled and said, “Well, I wouldn’t tell you if they were.” 
 
 
 
THE LENGTH OF TIME TO CRACK K1 THROUGH K3 (NOT K4) 
 
Jim: “Well, the reality is, it took a lot longer for it to come out than I 
expected. I mean, the first three, I figure it’d be cracked within weeks.” 
 
 
DOES HE WANT K4 CRACKED? 
 
Jim said, “Honestly, I had really hoped K4 would take this long or never be 
cracked. But the first three, I thought would be done quickly.” 
 
I asked, in his ideal scenario, would he want K4 cracked 
 
Jim: “Oh, I could care less if it’s cracked. I mean, I really don’t want, I 
would rather it, you know, outlive me.” 
 
I asked him why then he's given out clues. 
 
Jim said, “to allow it to keep simmering.” 
 
 
THE POSSIBILITY OF BURIED TREASURE 
 
I said that the plaintext of K2 mentions that it’s “buried out there.” 
Which makes me think that something might be buried on the grounds of the 
CIA. So when I visit the CIA, should I bring a shovel? 
 
Jim said: “I can’t respond to any questions about what may or may not be or 
happened or whatever.” 
 
 

[[page 3]]
 
 
CREATING THE CODE 
 
I asked him about his meetings with Ed Scheidt. I said that I’ve read that 
they never talked on the phone, but would meet in secret. 
 
Jim said, “At the time there was a little restaurant a few miles from the 
agency and we'd have lunch there, off in the corner talking in very hushed 
tones….I asked them to give me a history of codes more or less, you know, 
nobody had really written too much about it at the time. 
 
We did exchange some, some written material about the history of codes and 
I came up with a system based on the materials that he had given me and 
suggestions from him. You could do this, you can do that. You can do this, 
you can do that. There are codes that depend entirely on patterns. 
 
There are pattern codes that are woven into blankets in some countries in 
Africa in particular. I mean, so codes can come in many different shapes 
and sizes. 
 
So basically I was able to take that information and come up with codes and 
then I asked him what, you know, what could I use for the final section 
that would make it difficult there, you know, making it as difficult as 
possible, whatever. And he gave me a few, again, a few suggestions, all of 
which I could then modify myself into something that he wouldn't, he would 
have to have, he personally would then have to, take, go to great effort to 
find out what it said. 
 
But basically he doesn't know, he still doesn't know what it says. 
 
I used that information [the information on codes that Ed Scheidt told him] 
and manipulated it the way that I could in order to come up with all of the 
codes.” 
 
 
 
 

[[page 4]]
 
WILL THE FINAL ANSWER TO K4 BE ANTICLIMACTIC IF IT’S NOT SOMETHING 
MOMENTOUS, LIKE THE SECRET TO LIFE? 
 
Jim said, “Well, I have alluded to this many times, is once you decipher 
the plain text, once you have the text that doesn't necessarily mean you 
know what is going to happen. I mean, it's, it's something that at least 
you could call it a riddle, but it's not, it doesn't, it isn't like 
clarity, this moment of clarity, about what I've said.” 
 
I said, “You described it as a riddle within a riddle.” 
 
Jim said, “Yeah, that's right.” 
 
 
WHAT ARE SOME WRONG GUESSES 
 
Jim said he has received documents as much as 150 pages long with wrong 
guesses. I asked him for examples of wrong guesses. He said there was a 
“very elaborate scheme of KRYPTOS overlaying a satellite image of the CIA 
and somehow it made a guitar in the strings and neck of which extended to 
England.” 
 
 
MISTAKES 
 
I said that it seemed to me that some mistakes in the coded text were 
intentional and some by mistake. 
 
He said, yes. There were mistakes he didn’t mean to make. “There was nobody 
I could ask to proofread KRYPTOS. All I could do is read it over and over 
and over again. And you know how that works.” 
 
 
HOW IT FEELS TO HAVE CREATED KRYPTOS 
 
Jim said, “I do derive some satisfaction from having something like this, 
um, that's lasted so long, but frankly, the greatest satisfaction I get is 
that I have created an artwork which keeps on giving which is very 
difficult to do.” 
 
 
 

[[page 5]]
CAN K4 BE CRACKED WITH A COMPUTER? 
 
Jim said, “Sure. It’s possible. I’m sure it’s possible with nano 
computing.” 
 
I asked if I should try to get a nano computer. 
 
Jim said, “Well, I think it can be cracked. I think it ultimately could be 
cracked by, you know, it’s possible, who knows? But I mean, it could be 
done with pencil and paper. But it’s, just, you know, the more powerful 
computers become, the more easily codes are cracked.” 
 
 
ASIDE FROM JIM HIMSELF, WHO KNOWS THE ENTIRE ANSWER TO KRYPTOS? 
 
I said, “I know that William Webster, the former head of the CIA, you did 
tell him the answer, you gave him an envelope, but did you give him all the 
answers or is there some mystery that only you know?” 
 
Jim said: “Well, let's just say that the agency is not all about complete, 
uh, honesty. They don't like to expose anything in toto. And neither do I. 
I kind of played their game. For example, if I gave Webster the code and he 
opened it and told everybody what it was, then it doesn't bode well for the 
agency being able to keep a secret. Now, if he kept it secret and somebody 
leaked it, that doesn't look good for the agency either. So it doesn't 
matter whether I gave it all to him or not, because they basically don't 
look good if it gets out.” 
 
AJ: “I read another story, uh, that I don't know how true it is. Something 
about a meeting at the Department of Historical Intelligence where two 
women got part of it and, and they got very emotional. The stress was too 
much for them. Did I get that right? Or is that just KRYPTOS lore?” 
 
Jim: “I've told the story before. You've got most of it. I’m quite honest 
about this and I'm not making anything up when I tell you what that 
scenario was. I've already divulged a good bit of it anyway. So yeah, they, 
they, they didn't know what to do. They felt like they had to know what it 
said. 
 
There's an obvious reason, someone at the CIA had to know what was in it. I 
was going to put some pornography in there? Was I gonna say something anti 
CIA? Was I going to do this? Was I going to do that?  So, I understood that 
they needed to know what it said, but I interpreted that as meaning, well, 
they might need to know what it says, but they don't need to know what it 
says collectively. They don't need to know what the whole thing says. 
 

[[page 6]]
So I told them that I would give the text to the Department of Historical 
Intelligence and their office is in the middle of the agency in a small 
room, that's in the heart of the old building, which actually has a big 
graphic of the city of Moscow on the wall. 
 
And there's a little door, there's one single door into this small room. 
And I asked how many people are there and they said three people, I 
believe they told me. 
 
So I took the plain text of, I took the plain text of KRYPTOS and I made 
two packages. I made one package, which was for three people and I made one 
package, which was for two people. A package, by a package, I mean, I 
divided, I cut up the plain text into pieces. 
 
I gave a certain set of sentences to one individual, if there were two. And 
then the rest of the set to the other person. And they were mixed up, they 
weren't in order. 
 
And I did that for three people. So basically, I went into the room and I 
asked ‘Do any of you have an institutional or a photographic memory?’ And 
two of them immediately pointed to the third person in the room. 
 
And I asked that person to leave. 
 
It was very convincing that they pointed to this third person. So then 
we're left with a guy, a man and a woman. And so then I took out my little 
package for two people and I placed it. I just placed this pile of 
sentences in front of each one. They were sitting at separate desks. 
 
And after about, I don't know, just thirty seconds to a minute of them 
looking at it, the woman became very anxious and agitated and, and she had 
to be taken from the room.” 
 
I said, “What do you think was going on? She was just stressed by the 
responsibility?” 
 
Jim said, “Yeah, totally. It was all up to the two of them. And if in fact, 
if I had lied to them or I had done something untoward, they would be 
blamed for it and they'd lose their jobs. 
 
So then I picked it up, I picked up my little dog and pony show and took it 
all away with me. And at that point, um, it was decided to give it in an 
envelope to Webster.” 
 
 
 

[[page 7]]
 
SEEING KRYPTOS IN PERSON 
 
I told Jim I am visiting KRYPTOS in the near future. I asked if I would get 
any advantage from actually seeing it in person – like the shapes or 
shadows?” Jim said, “I can’t say.” 
 
He added, “I get that question once a week from people trying to crack it.” 
