Kryptos Summary

This is a quick overview of the various ideas and approaches that have been put forth in the Yahoo Kryptos newsgroups in the attempts to solve the Kryptos cryptogram.

The Kryptos sculpture has been encoded into four parts.  In this newsgroup, they are respectively called, K1, K2, K3, and K4.  K1, K2, and K3 are acknowledged by the sculptor, Jim Sanborn, as having been solved correctly, though not in a manner intended by the sculptor.    It is not yet known how clues contained in the solutions of K1, K2, and K3 contribute to the solution of K4.

K4 has not yet been solved, and is slowly (some might say ‘desperately slowly’) drawing more people interested in solving it.  The ideas for solving K4 can be separated into several different categories.  These are:
Cryptographic
Analytical
Physical Approaches
Other Approaches
This is not an exhaustive list.  It is also a list generated by someone not experienced in the area.

Cryptographic
These techniques attempt to solve the puzzle directly into a Standard English phrase or sentence.

These are trial and error attempts based on an understanding of historical cryptographic techniques, and are sometimes based on assumptions about the sculptor’s knowledge of cryptographic techniques.  The techniques that have been considered have been:
Simple Substitution
Vigenere Substitution 
Jefferson Cylinder Substitutions

These techniques usually require knowledge of the choice of method and keyword in order to decipher the cryptogram.  Brute force computerized implementations of these techniques have been attempted in an effort to solve the puzzle.  Since many folks have been trying for years to solve the puzzle this way, it is widely believed that more insight is needed.  Key players in this area are:
Jim Giloggly, who is credited with solving K1, K2, K3 on the sculpture, (http://www.voynich.net/Kryptos/)
Elonka Dunin, who came up with an alternate way of getting the K3 solution, and who started this newsgroup. ( HYPERLINK "http://www.elonka.com/kryptos/" http://www.elonka.com/kryptos/)

Of note, there are folks external to the Krytpos newsgroup who also have done work to solve the encryptions on the sculpture.  The most notable of these maintains a website at  HYPERLINK "http://www.kryptos-cia.com/" http://www.kryptos-cia.com/ . 
Analytical
In these approaches, folks are attempting to determine what technique was used to generate the cryptogram.

They are making use of knowledge of the expected statistical distributions of characters in an enciphered message, and the corresponding statistics associated with the puzzle to look for a match between the statistics for a technique and the statistics of the puzzle.  The folks using these approaches follow a process such as 
1) Encrypt a set of known messages using a technique, 
2) Generate the statistics for that set, 
3) Generate statistics for the puzzle, then
4) Compare statistics.

Also in this category are attempts to reconstruct the method used to encode K3.  Kryptos is believed to have been generated using paper and pencil methods.  Although K3 has been solved, it has been solved in a manner “not intended by the author”, and some in the group have felt that some insight can be gained by finding the original technique used to encode that section.  Two offerings of note in this category are:
From arrachion_kryptos: Write the entire 336 character text in a 4 row by 84 column grid.  Then starting with the last column, begin horizontally filling in a 48 row by 7 column grid.  Generate the cyphertext by reading down the last column, then the next to last column, etc.
From FitnezzJim: Write the entire 336 character text in a 4 row by 86 column grid.  This give you three full rows, and a fourth row that is eight characters short of 86 in length.  
[Notes: 1- The matrix is documented in the files section of the kryptos
 newsgroup ( HYPERLINK "http://f6.grp.yahoofs.com/v1/ABZpRBqfrdy0qxBsdFUtBFuMqOY_R78But6Dcar9j8nY6B9kVbp5IJ3NTZPDLb2MmNdpH3kZuEz9lJbkkCITRCwZCCbr7YsJYw/Transposition%20Matrix%20Solution.doc" Transposition Matrix Solution.doc ) 
2- Scytale method also communicated by r_klinge@yahoo.com]


Print those four lines in 12 point Lucinda Console font.  Wrap this around an old-style standard #2 pencil so that the ‘YAHR’ lines up above the ‘END’.  Continue wrapping, lining up all the red lines.  The encoded column wraps in a rising spiral around the pencil.  Now, tape the wrap, and slide it off the pencil.  Fold it so that it becomes flat, and attach the two ends so that ‘SLOWLY’ lines up right under ‘FLAMES’.  Now, if you start at the one blank spot on the ring, you have code text in four lines that reads out along the ordinate. The code text reads out along the abscissa in one long line of text. 

Physical Approaches
These approaches are either seeking to turn the solution of K4 into a character map, or are skipping over K4 altogether under the assumption that Kryptos is a nested set of puzzles with a physical on-site ‘look’ as a step in the solution.  This assumption is based in large part on the ‘other’ clues that are left in the Krytpos courtyard.  Morse code, geo-compasses, lodestones, rocks, and pools of water (with ducks and geese) appear at various places in the courtyard.  In many cases, these attempts are working towards the idea that we have to ‘look’ in a certain place in a certain way, perhaps even at a certain time before we get our next clue.

These approaches have come in several forms:
Physical mapping of the Krytpos courtyard. Check the  HYPERLINK "http://groups.yahoo.com/group/kryptos/" Kryptos newgroup for maps by KGLewis, and check the coordinate plot at Xenon’s website.
Attempts to turn K4 into a character based courtyard map.  Check the Krytpos newsgroup for  HYPERLINK "http://groups.yahoo.com/group/kryptos/" Patrick Maloney’s hypothesis. I like this one.  It may not be right, but I like it.
Optical Modeling Approaches.  Check the files at the  HYPERLINK "http://groups.yahoo.com/group/kryptos/" Kryptos newgroup.

Getting the facts helps a lot.  Elonka has a list for folks who have physical access to the site ( HYPERLINK "http://elonka.com/kryptos/wishlist.html" Elonka’s wish list).	


Other 
These approaches interpret the deciphered text of sections K1-K3 as clues on how to manipulate the characters to decipher K4.  These approaches tend to work towards uncovering messages that the decoder feels are consistent with what the original sculptor might have wanted to write about.  Both the techniques and message sometimes appear to be obscure to most members of the group.   HYPERLINK "http://members.aol.com/SciRealm/Kryptos.html" Here is the most well known of these attempts.

Also included in this category would be the possibility that Kryptos is just one piece in a mega-puzzle being crafted by Mr. Sanborn.  In this approach, folks are seeking clues from other works created by the sculptor, in hopes that they will provide insight into the correct solution.  (search  HYPERLINK "http://www.elonka.com/kryptos/" Elonka’s site for the sculpture list). Worth mention is the observation that one of the courtyard Morse streams decodes to ‘Invisible Forces’, which is the name of another of Mr. Sanborns sculptures.  The phrase ‘Invisible Forces’ has also been thought to be a reference to magnetic fields, which are presumably locally altered by other Kryptos pieces located in the courtyard.  

Conclusion?
	Many facts have been established, but their relevance pertaining to the Kryptos puzzle has not yet been determined.
An extremely large amount of conjecture has been offered, but none have yet provided a convincing solution.
This one won’t be settled until the original sculptor says its solved.
