[[page 1]]
View of the Valley of the Kings
license 
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
sa/2.0/deed.en | Source
Only W.W. Knows
Updated on August 27, 2016
November 26, 1922
The place was Tutankhamun’s tomb in the Valley of the Kings. 
Archeologist Howard Carter, inspired by the desire to dig up old 
history, was close to achieving the dream of opening King 
Tutankhamun’s tomb. The event is recorded in his journal.
“Slowly, desperately slowly, the remains of passage debris that 
encumbered the lower part of the doorway was removed. With 
trembling hands I made a tiny breach in the upper left hand 
corner, and then widening the hole a little, I inserted the candle 
and peered in. The hot air escaping from the chamber caused 
the flame to flicker, but presently details of the room within 
emerged from the mist. Can you see anything?”
The inner chamber of Tutankhamun’s was opened a few months after breaching the tomb on February 16th of 1923. The sarcophagus of 
Tutankhamun was opened February 12, 1924. Two days later, the sarcophagus was re-closed.
--------------------------------------------------------
In May of 1923, The Geographical Journal published an article titled "Air Survey and Archaeology". Aircraft had not yet achieved the capability 
to carry precious historical artifacts safely. The share of any such treasure would need to use slower, safer, transport. However, seeing things 
from a bird’s eye view could help in the search to uncover the secrets of history.
--------------------------------------------------------
Nearly seventy years later, James Sanborn, a sculptor with an interest in archeological history and the hidden forces of nature chose to encrypt 
the journal entry passage from John Carter’s journal on the sculpture called Kryptos. The sculpture Kryptos is located outside the lunch-room of 
the Central Intelligence Agency, somewhere in Virginia. Those who work to solve the encrypted messages on the Kryptos sculpture refer to this 
passage as K3.
Why was this journal entry chosen?
They did not have computers to aid in encryption in those days. But …
1924
Freemasonry existed, and a new printing of the masonic bible was published.
Students of history will tell you that some of the more well-known traditional methods for encrypting messages are believed to have been taught 
by the Masons. The Masons are also well-known for their interest in Egyptology and world history. Books by Dan Brown such as the Lost 
Symbol, or Angels and Demons leverage the combination of hidden messages and hidden histories to engage our interest in books and movies. 
The best way to make people aware of a hidden truth is to do so in such a way that they automatically discard that truth as fiction.
Computers did not exist in those days, but the Masons did. I am not a Mason, so I can only ask, what new methods of encryption might be 
hidden or demonstrated in the 1924 publication of the Masonic Bible? Perhaps none. After all, worldwide, the Bible in its various forms typically 
is a year-to-year number-one best-seller.
It took eight years to empty the tomb and transport its contents to Cairo. Some may believe that we never got the full story of what was 
contained in that tomb. Perhaps, for whatever reason, some of the contents never made it to Cairo, but instead remained hidden from us. 
Perhaps the contents were removed and moved to another location. Tantalizing hints available online through clever search suggest there was 
some minuscule opportunity to remove things without them being cataloged for the authorities. Perhaps, the implications to civilization were so 
serious that men responsible for guarding the secrets of history chose to hide even the fact that they were hiding something, by coming up with 
new encryption methods to communicate how the ‘information’ was transmitted.
In those days, the process of moving something from one place to another done by ship, a slow, desperately slow process. Eventually, our 
hypothetical cargo (something removed) would have been hypothetically transported to somewhere in these United States.
So, consider another decrypted passage from the sculpture Kryptos.
edit
stats
delete
submit to a HubPages Network Site
This Hub is not published, only you can see it.
Page 1 of 5
Only W.W. Knows
8/27/2016
http://hubpages.com/education/Only-WW-Knows

[[page 2]]
The Church Hill Tunnel
Screen Shot Captured from Google Maps. 
1925 & 1947 News Articles
Click thumbnail to view full-size
Letter To The Editor in 1947 | Source
Mausoleum
It was totally invisible. How’s that possible? They used the earth’s magnetic field. The information was transmitted underground to an 
unknown location. Does Langley know about this? They should, it’s buried out there somewhere. Who knows the exact location? 
Only W.W. This was his last message. Thirty eight degrees fifty seven minutes six point five seconds north, seventy seven degrees 
eight minutes forty four seconds west. Layer two.
Those who work to solve the encrypted messages on the Kryptos sculpture refer to this passage as K2.
October 1925
A work train was in a tunnel in Richmond Virginia when that tunnel 
collapsed, leaving that train trapped. A figure emerged from the 
tunnel and ran off into the dusk, with witnesses claiming to see a 
horrific creature. This horrific creature ran towards a local cemetery 
and vanished near a mausoleum. In later years, some claimed the 
mausoleum held the remains of a vampire.
Between subtle shading and the absence of light lies the nuance 
of illusion.
Those who work to solve the encrypted messages on the Kryptos 
sculpture refer to this passage as K1.
There are two locations of interest in this story. One is the Church Hill 
Tunnel, located in Richmond, Virginia. The other is the mausoleum of 
one W.W. Pool, also located in Richmond, Virginia.
Church Hill
During a visit to the Church Hill area, I spoke with two gentleman who 
were attending the celebration of the day in a park near there, Earl 
and Bobby (and my apologies if I spelled your names incorrectly). 
They did not know the exact location of the tunnel, but, they were 
able to google it. It turns out the park we were standing in actually 
sits at the top of the hill over the tunnel.
In the discussions that followed, we talked briefly about recent history 
in that area. It turns out that the local Virginia Commonwealth 
University had sought to purchase the land near there, for the 
purpose of turning the space into a parking lot. Residents of the area 
objected. They regard the area as sacred ground. When I asked, 
they said slave laborers had died there while building the tunnel. I 
thought this odd, since the tunnel was built shortly after the Civil War 
which supposedly ended slavery.
The book ‘Hidden History of Richmond’, indicates a poem ‘The Train 
That Will Never Be Found’ was written by brakeman of the Southern 
Railroad to commemorate the loss of the train and the workers after 
the collapse of the tunnel.
W. W. Pool
Page 2 of 5
Only W.W. Knows
8/27/2016
http://hubpages.com/education/Only-WW-Knows

[[page 3]]
Picture from 20 August 2016. This is the 
mantle above the mausoleum. Sources had 
indicated these(?) to be Egyptian or masonic 
symbols. Steganography, perhaps? | Source
The date on the mantle over the entrance is 
the date his wife was interred. Mr. Pool died 
February 1922, before the discovery 
documented by Howard Carter. | Source
Picture of front of mausoleum. | Source
The Mummy Room
Personal Photo of a Page from the Book 
'Atomic Time'. The photo is of an exhibit titled 
the Mummy Room. | Source
The tunnel tragedy also gave rise to a local vampire legend, 
associated with the mausoleum of W.W. Pool. The book ‘Haunted 
Richmond: The Shadows of Shockoe’ published in 2007 summarizes 
the Vampire Legend in the chapter ‘The Collapse of Richmond's 
Church Hill Tunnel’. This book indicates that because of the interest 
in vampires, and the vandalism that resulted, the mausoleum has 
been exhumed, and the remains have been moved to an unknown 
location. There are some claims that the mausoleum of W.W. Pool is 
covered in masonic and Egyptian symbols, so I went out to take a 
look. The name on the mausoleum is W.W. Pool. The mantle and a 
couple of other pictures are shown here.
The source of the legend is currently attributed to a worker running 
from the tunnel after the tunnel collapse in 1925. The account 
indicates the worker ran from there to the cemetery nearby. 
Wikipedia identifies the person who escaped from the tunnel as Tom 
Mason. The book does not name the worker who ran out of the 
tunnel. The news article above from 1947 indicates Mr. Mason was 
dug out from the tunnel October 10, 1925.
Between the collapse of the tunnel and the local legend of an ancient 
evil (a vampire) being awakened in the tunnel, it is no surprise that 
folks regard the area with respect. But in both cases, that respect 
appears to artificially leverage people’s fears. Years and years of 
watching Scooby Doo cartoons have convinced me that when a 
stories of the supernatural are invoked to encourage people to stay 
away from an area, that there is usually something else going on that 
people are trying to hide.
Mr. Pool died in February of 1922, so the K2 reference that declares 
‘Only W.W. knows’ does not refer to a living W.W. Pool knowing 
about anything that might have hypothetically been removed from the 
tomb Howard Carter opened in November 1922.
However, it is well known that only the dead can keep a secret, and 
what better place to keep it than in a mausoleum in a graveyard?
1983 - Richmond
Back to the artist that sculpted Kryptos. We know that our sculptor 
was exposed at an early age to things not typically seen by the 
public, because his father held the position of head of exhibitions at 
the Library of Congress. We also know that he studied archeology in 
England, the home country of Howard Carter. Did he develop an 
interest at an early age in Egyptology? Don’t we all?
In 1983, Artist Jim Sanborn developed an exhibit titled ‘The Mummy 
Room’ for the Virginia Museum of Fine Arts in Richmond Virginia. In 
his book, ‘Atomic Time’, Mr. Sanborn discusses how his work was 
influenced by Joseph Beuys. “Like Beuys, I employ natural objects 
and found objects and use them in large measure for their 
metaphorical content. For example, in 1983 I borrowed an Egyptian 
mummy from a university archeology department and used it in an 
installation I did at the Virginia Museum of Fine Arts (fig 32). I 
continued the practice of borrowing and exhibiting museum objects 
throughout my career.”
Page 3 of 5
Only W.W. Knows
8/27/2016
http://hubpages.com/education/Only-WW-Knows

[[page 4]]
To be honest, to this day, I still believe I saw this display not at the Virginia Museum of Fine Arts but at the Virginia Museum of Science nearby.
1990
While building the sculpture in the courtyard of CIA, a truckload of granite was stolen. The CIA had to purchase an additional truckload to 
support completing the sculpture. Where did that granite go?
Mr. Sanborn completed his installation of Kryptos in the courtyard of the CIA, outside their lunchroom, November of November 3, 1990. Nearly 
sixty-seven years had passed since the original opening of King Tutankhamun's tomb.
When he talks to those who are trying to solve the remaining 97 characters of Kryptos (we call it K4), Mr. Sanborn will often provide the hint that 
the decoded message may refer to something he may have buried out there (at CIA).
2016
In Richmond, Virginia, the train and its contents remain trapped in the tunnel. The tunnel has been sealed. The entrance is difficult to find, and 
research and review of on-line resources is recommended before going to take a look. Better yet, talk to someone in the area.
A recent visit to the Virginia Museum of Fine Arts has a mummy display, but it is a different display from the picture shown above.
In May of 2016 in the Valley of the Kings, researchers looked for a hidden chamber near the chamber of Tutankhamun. It is believed by some 
that the mummy of Queen Nefertiti is entombed somewhere nearby. So far, the search has come up empty, but the authorities in Egypt continue 
their search.
Around the world, the fourth part of Kryptos (called K4) remains unsolved. The sculptor indicates the part of K2 that says ‘Only W.W. knows’ is a 
reference to CIA director William Webster. 
Speculating otherwise makes for a good story.
Further Reading - W. W. Pool
• Richmond Vampire - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
The Church Hill tragedy eventually gave rise to legends of a vampire. This article on Wikipedia explains more.
• William Wortham Pool - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
No, he is not a vampire. But with the remains moved to another location, one is inclined to ask, who is buried in Pool's tomb?
• The Yahoo! Group for Solving Kryptos
Kryptos is a sculpture located at CIA HQ containing an encrypted message. Three of the four parts have been solved. This group is for 
people interested in working together to find a solution to Part 4.
Other Coincidences
The sculptor Jim Sanborn indicates the part of K2 that says ‘Only W.W. knows’ is a reference to then CIA director William Webster. He was 
director of CIA during the years 1987-1991.
The full courtyard that contains the sculpture Kryptos includes two pools. One pool sits at the base of the sculpture. The other pool sits next to 
and between tilted granite slabs.
William Downing Webster, described as a British collector of ethnographic art, died 1913. The wife of W.W. Pool died 1913. W.W. Pool died 
1922, as noted earlier in this article. The date of his wife’s death is scribed over the mausoleum.
A W.W. Pool resided in Horsey, Virginia during the late 1800’s.
The Egyptian word for hidden is yamanu. An internet search for the “Egyptian Word for hidden” returns, amongst a long list of interesting links, a 
discussion indicating “Amaunet (and Amun) … were regarded as protective Deities: They are addressed as "Amun and Amaunet, You Who 
protect the Gods, and Who guard the Gods with Your shadows". Though Nun and Naunet are described in a similar manner, it seems especially 
appropriate for Amun and Amaunet, Who both represent the mysterious and invisible hidden forces of nature, to give protection through their 
shadows; implicit in the idea of a shadow is that things can be hidden there.”
The parents of Tutankamun (Akhenaten and Nefertiti) are noted for their efforts to make Aten the focus of worship for normal everyday 
Egyptians. The god they chose to be the one god was Aten, commonly thought of as the sun god.
“Girasol” in some languages is another form of the word girasol, or sunflower.
An online MIT website includes a resume indicating Mr. Sanborn studied Archeology at Oxford University, roughly 60 miles from Kensington, 
England, home of Howard Carter.
Amaunet is also spelled Amonet, Amunet, Amentet, Amentit, Imentet, Imentit, and Ament.
© 2016 FitnezzJim
More by this Author
Page 4 of 5
Only W.W. Knows
8/27/2016
http://hubpages.com/education/Only-WW-Knows

[[page 5]]
16
GEOLOGY & ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCE
Thor and Global Warming
Many people are saying ‘get rid of the all the snow and bring back global warming’. Perhaps they say that because it is difficult to understand how the 
two might be coming from the same effect.
10
INTELLECTUAL HISTORY
Encrypted Books
There are several books from history that are not yet decrypted. This article is a brief introduction to efforts to read those books, and talks about 
recent events related to the Kryptos sculpture.
3
SCIENCE FICTION
The Time Travelers Dilemma – (5) More Threads
This is the fifth part in a multipart fictional investigative story as told by a time traveling investigator. As Schrodinger might say 'Any similarity with 
reality is probably true'.
Page 5 of 5
Only W.W. Knows
8/27/2016
http://hubpages.com/education/Only-WW-Knows
