## word/document.xml
 
 Hi, 
 
 I name this “Chicken Wire method”! 
 
 
 Three characters at each location - 
 If you see JS’s matrix he built which was also recently shared in this group.. 
 He has code for K2 in 3 characters each from the V’s sheet ( the Matrix he has in next to the Cipher, where KRYPTOS goes diagonally ) 
 Each interaction produces 3 characters, 
 Which are used throughout in K 1,K2 ,K3. 
 When he says you have to solve the other Ciphers first...  
 using his own sheet he example .. 
 He has everything in a strict order, he picked up certain characters( 3 , example BNS ) to use in K4. 
 The real story is NOT in the characters of K4 but the walls inside each columns . 
 Example: 
 
 Take 1st and 2nd columns  
 U at 5, 
 T at 36, 
 V at 67 
 And next to it 
 OWT column at 6, 38, 68. 
 
 The story is in the 3 rd or 1st characters of the inner column. 
 Example suppose AUV at 5. 
 SLV at 67 ( S is coming down from 35 position and is SON at position 35, notice N came from YEN at 65 ) 
 In other words, the last character goes to the corresponding opposite position to make up the combination of that character. 
 Like if you have # sign in both direction . 
 Each of the 3 characters at a certain spot is giving feed to the upper or lower character in next column. 
 Take example of  
 T at 68 
 It’s ITW( I as in BERLIN ) 
 Then W above i it is already coming from ITW, now W has to be the middle position to produce EWT 
 EWT 
 ITW 
 
 This example combination satisfies the V’s sheet for a certain spot( look at EWT and ITW in the matrix ) 
 
 He plucked out EWT and ITW from the sheet he used with pen and paper. 
 
 Now moving forward... 
 E at 37 ( decided from W at 37 ) and T at  36 has to be IRT ) 
 Where R comes from PSR ( look at NYPVTT - BERLIN - P being PSR in the matrix ) 
 Here I for IRT comes from ( ITW  - at 68 , I being I in BERLIN) 
 
 So each of the diagonal upper or lower X junction within inner columns feed each other. 
 
 Now going back to what we have E at 38, I at 68( decoded ), T( coded and I in IRT being the decoded character at this position ) 
 E and T and then I , so to satisfy the inner column for the matrix from JS 
 We need to have a W or A in the innner column of 5, 37, 68 and next to it. 
 That’s where AUV comes at position 5. 
 ETA 
 Again satisfies the Matrix at the same time they are in 3rd or 1st positions. 
 
 How did we come up with L as the decoded character for V? 
 TTL 
 Look at the characters. 
 They ALL have to satisfy the bigger picture or V’s matrix he provided. 
 
 Each time we encounter K, R, Y, P, T, O S 
 We flip the 3 characters example  
 PSR at 66 ( R from BERLIN )  
 But R is also in KRYPTOS, so  
 It would become RSP , now P has to satisfy With the inner column  
 So we have ITW at position 68 ( I as in BERLIN ) 
 
 But T is also in KRYPTOS so we flip and  
 It becomes WIT. 
 Now PWE satisfies V’s Matrix he provided. 
 
 So the characters are ALL interrelated from V’s matrix ( look back at his pen and paper sheet ) 
 Pick 3 characters from the combination and use it in K4. 
 
 This way the Key is all there in front of us we have the just see the diagonal positions and feed the corresponding opposite above or below characters 3 characters so that it satisfies V’ matrix and his pen and paper sheet. 
 
 Now to make the K4, all he did is cherry picked 1 character at position 1 or 3 to put in K4, making it difficult as if we know what is at the center at position 2 then the V’s matrix could be applied. 
 But now we have to find 1, 2 or 2,3 from the inner columns as explained above. 
 The task of flipping the KRYPTOS using  
 Spots are very important. 
 That’s what confuses the most ( me too ! ) 
 
 But as you see, there is NO key involved, NO hashing and changing positions involved. 
 We have to look the inner columns characters for each column. 
 He has marked numbers on the postings of K4 and is very specific not to move them around in K 1,k 2, K3 and K4. 
 
 This way we use his decoded characters from the above codes  and come up with the inner columns. 
 
 This is a method where 1 feeds the other spot. But no key is used. 
 If we try to use keys in K4, the flipping of characters will never produce as defined result. 
 
 I have a certain idea, but the other issue is if he changed any character and made a deliberate mistake. Then it throws a curve ball. 
 
 Another reason he didn’t give clues from just above each other, because it would help in finding the corresponding characters in position. 
 The only major clue is positions for BE and ST ( in NORTHEAST) which he gave out. 
 
 Here BHN, YEN satisfies BNS( S at SSO at 33 ). 
 
 
 
 Thanks   
 Sukhwant  
 