[[page 1]]
Page 1 of 10 
 
Supporting a Two-Step Decryption 
October 20, 2019 – Finding Supporting Facts for the Single (Public) Key-
Transposition-Substitution-Concealment Mask Decryption (identical to C2 K4 Double-
Mask-OTP hypothesis 2019-07-15) 
Decryption Approach from Moscow Billboard Problem (2019-10-18) 
 
 
Establish the K4 Public Key with a matrix of 14 column x 7 rows (98 = 7 x 2 x 7) 
? 
O 
B 
K 
R 
U 
O 
X 
O 
G 
H 
U 
L 
B 
S 
O 
L 
I 
F 
B 
B 
W  F 
L 
R 
V 
Q 
Q 
P 
R 
N 
G 
K 
S 
S 
O 
T 
W  T 
Q 
S 
J 
Q 
S 
S 
E 
K 
Z 
Z 
W  A 
T 
J 
K 
L 
U 
D 
I 
A 
W 
I 
N 
F 
B 
N 
Y 
P 
V 
T 
T 
M  Z 
F 
P 
K 
W  G 
D 
K 
Z 
X 
T 
J 
C 
D 
I 
G 
K 
U 
H 
U 
A 
U 
E 
K 
C 
A 
R 
 
Transposition of Public Key to BERLINCLOCK crib for standard decode 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
M  U 
Y 
K 
L 
G 
K 
O 
R 
N 
A 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Apply XOR, Vernam, OTP, Vigenère Tabula Recta, or Running Key Decryption 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B 
E 
R 
L 
I 
N 
C 
L 
O 
C 
K 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1:1 Relationship is maintained as the ultimate plaintext 
Encryption
Phoenetic Masking of 
Plaintext
Standard Subsitution 
Encryption +n
(XOR, Vernam, OTP, 
Vigenere Tabula Recta, 
Running Key)
Transposition of K4 Public 
Key to produce K4
(K4 CIPHERTEXT)
Decryption
Transposition of K4 
ciphertext to produce 
decryption key
(K4 PUBLIC DECRYPT 
KEY)
Public Key substitution -n 
Decryption applied to K4
(XOR, Vernam, OTP, 
Vigenere Tabula Recta, 
Running Key)
Human interpretation of 
phoenetic masking

[[page 2]]
Page 2 of 10 
 
Proposed Transposition Method 
The transposition is a stream cipher done in the analog style of a Jefferson disk. 14 disks of 7 
characters are ordered, and then rotated/spun around to produce the K4 public decryption key 
used for the substitution decryption. 
  
Since conventional substitution should be used, BERLINCLOCK on positions 64-73 will require K4 
to be manipulated to produce MUYKLGKORNA as a partial crib. The question mark will be skipped, 
but was required for the original matrix. 
Running the proposed Moscow Billboard through the wringer 
The next goal is to see if the proposed approach can be supported through the accounts by various 
members in the Yahoo! Kryptos Group. 
2013 Richard SantaColoma notes 
In light of the fact that Sanborn had, in November of 2010, given the clue that “letters 64-69 
NYPVTT in part 4 encode the text BERLIN”, several questions were asked about this. One question 
was, “Then you are saying that N=B, Y=E, etc.?”. Sanborn answered to the positive, while Ed seemed 
less ready to acknowledge this. I do not know if this is because of a misunderstanding of the 
question, or because of Ed’s reluctance to go that far, or because Ed himself was not entirely certain 
if this was the final outcome. However, as Ed professes to not know the actual answer, although he 
knows the cipher type used, he therefore should know whether or not there is an actual letter for 
letter correspondence. So I came away from the answer thinking that either Sanborn did not exactly 
know what was being asked, or that there is this letter for letter correspondence. I favor the latter 
If the above is true, then a 1:1 relationship is possible, but Ed’s reluctance is more of a technicality whereby a transposition of 
K4 (Public Key) is required to decode NYPVTT to BERLIN. From Jim’s standpoint, K4 can also be treated as a single 
polyalphabetic substitution decryption with an encrypted transposed public key. 
 
Ed Schiedt made the point that (paraphrasing as close as I can remember), “Panel four’s cipher was 
designed so that English could not be used as an aid in deciphering”. Questions were asked about 
this statement, among them, “Are you saying it is not in English?”, and Ed seemed reluctant to 
answer directly… only repeating “…English could not be used as an aid”. So my take on that is that it 
is either not in English, or the system employed would obviate any attempts at using character 
counts to solve it. 
The masking system is done at the plaintext level as a phonetic mask to deter brute forcing. 

[[page 3]]
Page 3 of 10 
 
2019 Richard SantaColoma notes 
German Guy’s Proposal: Elonka asked Jim if anyone who guessed through his proposal “system” 
(the $50 a shot thing) had come close. At first, Jim said “no”. But then after a pause, he said 
something to the effect of, “Well one guy worried me for a minute”, or maybe, “One got had me 
scared”, or like that. Elonka asked him to elaborate, and he said that a German guy had given a 
“solution” that seemed very close at first, but then, on (some sort of) further examination, turned 
out to be wrong. So this begged the question… and Elonka and I asked in different ways… “what” 
about the solution made him think it was wrong, then? The only thing I could think was that the 
result was close to correct, but that the method used told Sanborn that the result was either a lucky 
guess or happy error. So I asked, specifically, after a short back and forth, “If a person gave you an 
answer which was 100% correct, would you care how the person arrived at it?” He answered, 
firmly, “I don’t care how they do it”. 
To properly decode K4 97 out of 97 characters, there is only ONE possible public key. Jim would be indifferent on the 
transposition process of K4 to obtain the final public key. 
Transposition information 
“Matrices”: Jim was explaining, on at least two occasions, his passion for matrices. But he was also 
discussing, using hand gestures, “rotating” them, and I think (?) “flipping” or “mirroring” them 
(could be wrong on those last two). As a noobie to this, and not being a cipher expert, I mention it 
because I am not sure that “rotating” the matrices was a part of the solved K1-K3. If not, then I 
would say this is some sort of possible suggestion, because he was stating it in relation to these 
panels, perhaps a further way to glean another layer of information from them? Yeah, not strong… 
but again, mentioned “because”. 
The transposition of K4 ciphertext to the produce the key is unconventional (non‐rule based). 
Megellis – March 2019 Kryptos Lunch notes 
Heard 2 things from Ed Scheidt. For one, he mentioned the idea of a prism as being useful.  As he did 
not elaborate, I take it he was comparing a masking layer to a piece of glass which takes in a 
mixture of light wavelengths and splits them into the different components of white light.  I can't 
say I'd ever looked at it quite that way, but it doesn't tell me anything new about what a masking 
layer does.  It's not an all-fours metraphor, as the prism differentiates the spectrum based on the 
specific characteristics of the wavelength mix put into it; a masking layer, so far as I can understand 
it, specifically ignores the values input, and "bends the colors", so to speak, into a variegated output 
which has as little relation to the input as can be managed.  Anyway, I did understand that 
statement to have been in relation to Kryptos-cracking. 
Ed Scheidt offers another cryptic clue on a potential stream cipher for the transposition component of K4. This is not the first 
time he has mentioned the prism metaphor – which may imply a stream of SEVEN rows (Red‐Orange‐Yellow‐Green‐Blue‐
Indigo‐Violet) instead of SEVEN colours from white light. 
2019 Elonka Dunin – Langley Visit Day 3 – March 2019 
When asked whether it was necessary to know the solutions to 1-3 in order to solve 4, Jim said no. 
The ciphertext & plaintext of K1, K2, and K3 are not required to decrypt K4. K4 can be used to decrypt itself – literally. 
It's not necessary to have a particular book to solve K4, just "to be able to read". 
Referring to the plaintext being phonetically masked – likely there’s a reflective or circular process of transforming K4, 
applying it to K4 to be decrypted and then repeating the process until words or phrases appear.  

[[page 4]]
Page 4 of 10 
 
We spent quite a bit of time asking Jim about the correlation between the plaintext BERLIN and the 
ciphertext such as NYPVTT. Specifically, we were trying to find out if there was a 1:1 relationship 
from NYPVTT to BERLIN, or there was some other step, the masking technique. Jim was confused 
when we mentioned masking technique, evidently it's something that Ed said that Jim didn't 
understand. Jim said that yes the ciphertext and plaintext were connected, but when I tried to 
explain what exactly we were asking, like that in K1 EMUFPH is exactly BETWEE, but in K3 
ENDYAH does not map exactly to SLOWLY, Jim backed off and said he would only commit to the fact 
that K4 is exactly 97 characters long, and that BERLIN is plaintext that starts at exactly the 64th 
character, but he wouldn't go further than that. 
If K4 is decrypted by transposition (to produce public decrypt key) then substitution, Jim would prefer not to disclose the steps 
to decoding K4. BERLIN starting exactly at the 64th position means that there is some form of substitution occurring from the 
64th to 73rd position to produce BERLINCLOCK. The transposition portion is not exactly manipulating the ciphertext, but 
assembling the public decryption key. 
2015 Scheidt Workshop Transcript – Richard Bean 
[3:55] I look at cryptography as building things ... there's other aspects, and maybe from your 
perspective ... in the sense of ... if you had a cryptographic paradigm is there a way to break it or 
understand it or what's the schema that's involved in that. 
Classical ciphers are fundamentally substitutions and transpositions. 
Q: I've got K1, 2 and 3 are one-stage encryption - is that also true for K4 [47:06]  
aha - now yeah you're closer to that answer than [saying???] is at one stage [47:16] 
no, I would consider it more than one stage [47:19]  
The proposed decryption is a two‐stage process. 
 
I've mentioned earlier and I have mentioned in public there's a masking technique that applied so 
that the English language wouldn't be available [47:35] 
Masking to be done at the plain text level in the event the approach is discovered. 
[what is clue in plain sight / duress code] [53:45] [Jim] has said that something that was key is no 
longer there. Jim questions ... [no clear answers]  
[masking first then encryption? or the other way around] [no clear answer] 
Masking is a destructive/irreversible step on the plaintext – it can ONLY be done on the plaintext. 
Bill Briere Notes – Nov 3, 2013 
8. Someone asked about the previously stated one‐to‐one correspondence of the plaintext to the 
ciphertext, at least for positions 64‐69. Many accept this as settled; but I don’t think it is. It’s not that I’m 
clinging to the need for it to NOT be that, but I think that some of the likely candidates would require it. 
Jim again stated, pretty convincingly, that it was 1:1. I asked Ed ‐‐ some might say untactfully ‐‐ if he 
would answer the same question. He hesitated and looked to Jim for guidance on what to say, then 
didn’t say anything. I believe that Ed’s hesitation indicates that either it was NOT a 1:1 correlation, or 
that the answer was not something that was black‐and‐white, or that he could not answer without 
maybe taking a look at the piece. Again, Ed may not know exactly what was done, but he might be 
skeptical of what Jim thinks he knows about 1:1. My take‐away is this: If Ed’s answer were going to be 
the same as Jim’s, there wouldn’t have been any hesitation in answering. Also noted, a bit later (I think), 

[[page 5]]
Page 5 of 10 
 
that Jim gave Ed (and maybe me, too) a dirty look, possibly for talking too much, and indicated that we 
had gotten quite enough information already and that he (Jim) would be the only one to give out clues. 
(Sorry, Jim. Love you, man.) 
Ultimately K4 is decrypted from a standard polyalphabetic substitution, BUT the key must be constructed by changing the 
character positioning of K4 to obtain the K4 public key. This technicality is what makes Ed hesitate because it could severely 
mislead Kryptos codebreakers. 
 
Thomas Fulmer – 2007 DC Visit 
3. Question was asked if he considered substitution followed by transposition (or the reverse) 
qualified as "masking" --Ed Laughed and gave no reply 
Masking is done at the plaintext level, and if Ed answered, he would be giving away the decryption steps. 
 
4. In a conversation with Elonka, Ed repeatedly spoke about the code being "Reflective" When 
asked if he meant symmetric, he replied, "Reflective" 
Reflective describes the circular process where K4 is transformed and applied to K4 (decryption) to produce a plaintext 
result. Symmetric would imply that the K4 public key is the same for encryption and decryption. In terms of standard XOR, 
Vernam, OTP, Vigenerie, or running key, the keys are asymmetric in nature. Encoding is generally a +n step, and decoding is a 
‐n step. 
Elonka Dunin – 2007 DC Visit (Dinner) 
* K4 uses a system "unknown to anyone on the planet" 
The unknown to anyone on the planet refers to an unorthodox transposition to produce the K4 public key. 
* His job wasn't breaking codes, it was designing them 
Code design deals with creating a cipher and addressing the key in terms of distribution and security. 
* When I asked if the method for K4, once understood, could be re-used for other messages, he said, 
"The concept could." 
* He says all crypto boils down to substitution and transposition (I pointed out concealment) 
Conceptually a self‐decoding cipher can be reused as long as the basic substitution/transposition ciphers are understood. 
* He said the first parts of Kryptos were "simple" substitution, to show that it was in English. He 
said he could have double-transposed part 1 and it "never would have been solved" 
A double transposition will equate to a single transposition. The difficulty lies with the distribution of the key and/or 
deciphering tableau for substitution. 
* He was describing my analysis as "trying to find the method." With the implication that that's the 
wrong way to go about it. 
K4 does not use a specific known cipher (i.e. playfair, railfence, etc.) but has its own unique analog encryption. It is more 
important to understand the approach first then go for the problem. In this case, it’s about dealing with the transposition of 
K4 to produce the public key. The substitution component is largely dependent on the transposition anyways. 
* Referred to "bias" as helping out the frequency counters. The masking technique is designed to 
remove the bias 

[[page 6]]
Page 6 of 10 
 
Frequency counting would give clues on the nature of the substitution/transposition – K4 is to be decoded by analog means 
and not computer brute forcing. 
2005 DC Trip - D1stancerunner20 
We talked quite a bit about problems in high performance computing, to communications methods, 
and short comings in current cryptographic systems. In this discussion a couple of interesting 
things came up, they were not related to talking directly about Kryptos but they may have some 
meaning. One thing that was mentioned several times was symmetry in nature and it's value in 
cryptography. One thing he mentioned was how the Egyptians built the pyramids and they have 
standed the test of time, because of their symmetry. The concept that nature tends to be 
symmetrical was mentioned a couple of times.  
 
K4 is an asymmetrical cipher in the sense that the K4 public decryption key is different from the encryption key. In this sense, 
this is Ed Scheidt cryptically referring to public key cryptographic methods. 
 
Another thing that I cued in on was when he mentioned light and it's use in cryptography. This was 
not when talking about Kryptos either. However, he mentioned about the use of light in 
cryptography. He mentioned a prism and how it breaks white light into it's individual components. 
Then came the part that fascinating; when talking about electromagnetic signals (this part is 
theoretical), he mentioned modifying either the H vector or the E vector, and being able to transfer 
light information onto twisted-pair (copper wire). He said he presented this idea about 5 years ago 
so it may not have any relation to Kryptos (although he may have been thinking about it for some 
time). Interesting, Kryptos is copper and conveys information through light by us being able to see 
it in the visible spectrum :) 
Prism referring to a potential version of a stream cipher for the transposition component. A prism may refer to 7 streams 
from the 7 colours. 
2005 Elonka Dunin – 2005 DC Notes 
Scheidt said that every letter in K4 will be used, "like the other sections" 
Refers to the usage of all 97 characters. The question mark remains in limbo, but has been used for the hypothesized 
decryption. 
Scheidt said he has not done a reverse check of K4 himself, but he's confident that it was done 
correctly. 
Since it is a two step process, Ed can confirm at the K4 public key level (only one possible key) and not apply the decryption 
steps to K4. 
 
2013 Kryptos Dinner - Doug Price 
3. Ed implied (in fact, I'd go as far as saying he "stated") that there is a masking step prior to the 
encryption. K1/2/3 have English as the plaintext, where you can use language statistics to help 
solve the cipher. "In K4, I took that advantage away from you". He implied/stated that he did 
something with the plaintext prior to encrypting to change the language statistics; this is different 
than just using a long key (running key, composite key, etc.) to encrypt the message -- if he did that 
he would not have described his process the way he did. 

[[page 7]]
Page 7 of 10 
 
This is the only time that Ed has stated the masking step is done PRIOR to encryption. That is, the masking step is done on the 
PLAINTEXT. 
2006 New York Times Interview – Ed Scheidt 
He (Ed Scheidt) said a good code, even if it's complex, should be usable easily. 
The proposed decryption is not complex and easily usable (conventional substitution using a K4 public key) 
2015 Ed Scheidt Workshop – Elonka Dunin Notes 
When asked about whether the masking technique was applied to the plaintext before encryption, 
or after decryption, he "deferred". 
Refer to 2013 Kryptos Dinner – Ed says masking step prior to encryption. 
2013-05-30 https://kryptosfan.wordpress.com/2013/05/30/jim-sanborn-
answers-kryptos-questions/ 
Is the 4th part 97 or 98 letters? try both 
98 characters are required for the transposition of K4 (step one to produce the public decryption key) 
Who do you think is most likely to solve K4? a Vulcan 
KRYPTOS must be deciphered in a logical manner using factual information. 
Is the actual code/cipher breaking secondary to the actual process of understanding what Kryptos 
really means? both are important 
Without understanding of the cipher, the plaintext does not have as much meaning. 
Any advice for people who “get so close” after a complicated multi-step decryption effort who are 
convinced that they just need more steps or help to solve it? you get it all or nothing at all 
The K4 Public Key must be transformed perfectly. 
2013 ACA Convention: - Jim M’s notes 
It was asked if N decodes to B, Y decodes to E, etc, etc. and Jim confirmed it does. Emphatically.  
Jim Sanborn rattled through the entire crib: 
N = B, 
Y = E, 
P = R, 
V = L, 
T = I, 
T = N 
When the same question was asked to Ed, Jim cut in and said “I’m the only one who knows.” 
It was asked if N decodes to B or encodes to B, and Jim stated “decodes”.  

[[page 8]]
Page 8 of 10 
 
It was asked if K4 was a “one-off”. Some discussion ensued about the definition of “one-off”, but Ed 
looked to Jim and said “well Jim, how are we going to answer that one?”. To which Jim simply 
replied “we don’t answer it”. 
The most important information is that K4 is done by decryption. This is very important for standard substitution ciphers 
(XOR, Vernam, OTP, Vigenère Tabula Recta, etc.) 
Elonka jumped in to remind Ed that he once told her that Kryptos uses a system unknown to 
anyone on the planet. Ed stated he didn’t recall that conversation, and back-pedaled out of saying 
anything more. 
The unknown part refers to the unique analog process for transposition. 
1991 ABC Interview 
How did you decide what message to encode? 
Well that changed during the course of the project as well. And that developed largely from the 
reading that I did about the Agency. And also while I was cutting out, physically cutting out the 
copperplates, things in my own mind changed. I wanted to put something on there which would -- 
Let's just say, that once the plate is deciphered, I'm not convinced the true meaning will be clear 
even then. I've made a statement which is straightforward, but that leads to something else. There's 
another deeper mystery. As you peel off a layer of an onion, the myst-- you get closer to the heart of 
what it is. And so y'know I just wanted to make it even after it was deciphered, you had to go deeper 
and decipher something else. It's in English, it's in plain English, it's in text, and you can read it, but 
that isn't necessarily the whole story. 
Implications of a potential K5. 
2011 CBC Interview w/ Q Podcast: Jian Gomeshi for BERLIN clue – Jim Sanborn 
54:31 Interviewer: Which I certainly don't know wh-what that means, other than one of my favorite 
cities in the world, but...ah...Do you expect that we’ll see the code broken anytime soon?  
54:39 JS: It’s wha- It 6 of 97 characters. The odds…the odds of getting the rest--I mean if you’re a 
very good cryptographer, your odds are certainly improved. But the odds of-of-of filling in the lines 
in text around it, you know, are-it’s still difficult and very challenging code, I must say. 
And…um…That’s not to say won’t give another-, in another decade, when I am 75 [Interviewer 
laughs] I might give another clue. And maybe when I am 85, I will give another clue. And all these 
clues, perhaps, will add up to something that, you know, is-is infinitely crack-able. Um…I started 
this piece the in 1988, and installed it in like 1990. And…um...During that period of time, the Berlin 
Wall fell. 
The infinite portion refers to the trial and error of the K4 public key to produce a plaintext. Since it appears the K4 public key 
transformation algorithm is not disclosed, this may suggest the infinite possibilities. 
55:29 Interviewer: Well, when this [Break] Well, the...Maybe you just gave us another clue!? 
I’m..people [SB Laughs] ju..I hope that people are listening to this. That...Ah…um…That, in fact, 
everything that you say is a clue, I-I am even convinced.  
55:39 JS: Well, yes, there is-there is a serious, [Interviewer laughs] sort of, forensic..um..[SB laughs] 
[Interviewer laughs] dissection … 

[[page 9]]
Page 9 of 10 
 
Berlin itself is extremely important as the K4 decryption would require MUYKLG decryption of NYPVTT to produce BERLIN. 
There is only one M and one Y in K4. 
2003 Sanborn Trip – Elonka Dunin 
- He commented how it was odd that "no one has recovered the original matrix". He kept using that 
word "matrix" quite a bit, such as to say "matrix system". Evidently there's something important 
about re-creating the exact system that he used for encrypting the messages, and he has never seen 
anyone do that yet (and didn't see it anywhere on my slides). 
Matrix may refer to the 14x7 K4 matrix that will be transposed to yield the K4 public decryption key. 
- Similar to how Scheidt reacted, I saw Sanborn light up when I talked about how the extra "L" on 
the tableau side now means that we have the same number of characters on both the cipher 
alphabet and tableau sides. Neither Scheidt nor Sanborn *said* anything when I talked about that, 
but I definitely noticed both of them reacting, like sitting up or forward a little more, nodding like 
this was something that they knew and were glad that someone had noticed. 
The extra L refers to the stenographic clue for K2 deciphering tableau. This outlines the tableau (top right portion) and the 
bottom left is found by looking at the W in the tableau left side. 
- When I asked about the misspellings and asked if they were accidental or deliberate, Sanborn said 
that they were deliberate, but it was less important *what* they were. He said, and I quote: "it's 
more the orientation of those letters that's useful there." Later on in the evening he repeated that 
point, saying it was the "positioning" that was important. 
Perhaps the errors may suggest a hidden algorithm such as PALIMP(C)EST being the 7th character on the key. 
- Sanborn was adamant that Scheidt did *not* do the encryption. He said that Scheidt did teach him 
various systems "going back to Caesar", and that Sanborn used "several" of them, but that the actual 
encryption was done by Sanborn, by himself, during the time that he was driving the petrified tree 
from the southwestern U.S. back to the DC area. Sanborn said that he and Scheidt had agreed to 
keep it "compartmentalized" like that. Sanborn insisted that when it came to the encryption, he said 
(referring to himself) that it was "entirely me." 
The encryption steps are fairly straightforward: write out plaintext, phonetically mask the plaintext, encrypt +n and then 
scatter (transform) the result. 
- Sanborn said that no one else beta-tested the code -- not even Scheidt. When I commented that 
first-time code creators often make errors that leave a code unsolvable, he said that he was certain 
that he did it right. He said though he has never gone back to decrypt it, because that keeps it more 
secure. 
There is ultimately one combination on K4 public key that will yield 97 of 97 characters for the decrypt. 
- Getting back to Kryptos, Sanborn commented that he was surprised that no one had tried 
recovering the original matrix and running it through all possible "shifts". 
- He said that "Kryptos wasn't cracked the reverse of the way that I did it." 
Refers to a potential asymmetrical public key problem where the encryption steps will differ from the decryption steps. 

[[page 10]]
Page 10 of 10 
 
 
2010 – NPR All Things Considered – Radio Interview w/ Jim Sanborn 
JS: OK, well I mean really, it's 6 characters out of 97.  And I dangled the clue BERLIN, but I also 
divulged or gave images of my original decoding charts, the ones that I... well actually for me they 
were encoding charts.  And I think once the Kryptophiles study it in a forensic manner there might 
be revelations in there.  So in a way I gave more than just BERLIN, I think I gave other information 
as well. 
BERLIN is a vital clue in the process due to the required conventional substitution of NYPVTT being decoded by MUYKLG. 
There is only 1 M and 1 Y present on K4 and they are not on the 64th and 66th positions respectively. Some sort of 
transposition IS required to construct the K4 public key. 
2014 – New York Times Clue (CLOCK) 
When asked whether his new clue was a reference to this Berlin clock, Mr. Sanborn, sounding 
pleased, said, “There are several really interesting clocks in Berlin.” 
He added, “You’d better delve into that particular clock,” a favorite of conspiracy theorists because 
of the mysterious death in 1991 of its designer, Dieter Binninger. With all the intriguing 
timekeepers in the city, including the “Clock of Flowing Time,” Mr. Sanborn said, “There’s a lot of 
fodder there.” 
The particular clock may refer to the BERLINCLOCK crib literally. To decrypt NYPVTTMZFPK, the characters MUYKLGKORNA 
are required and can be constructed from the transformation of K4 into a public key. 
Conclusion 
The Moscow Billboard approach is identical to the C2 K4 Double Mask-OTP Hypothesis proposed 
on July 15, 2019. Through review of information gathered by the Kryptos community over the 
years, the approach can be substantiated.  
