[[page 1]]
Page 1 of 3 
 
The Kryptos Moscow Billboard Problem 
Hypothesizing an approach to decrypt K4 (October 18, 2019) 
 “How do you put Kryptos on a billboard in Moscow, so it means something?” – 2011 
DC Gather (Elonka Dunin 2011 dinner notes) 
The literal interpretation is putting the 7 characters “KRYPTOS” on a billboard in Moscow. Cryptically 
speaking, Mr. Scheidt has revealed several clues on approaching K4 after the billboard problem is 
fundamentally understood. Imagine during the Cold War an encoded message from Langley has to be 
sent to a Moscow operative in deep cover. The only way to send the message is through a public 
billboard that can be seen and analyzed by the Russian government. Armed with only pencil and 
paper, what is the minimum decryption steps required to thwart Russian computational brute force 
yet have the operative execute an analog decryption?  
To simplify the problem, some assumptions are made: 
1. The message will be KRYPTOS (English characters only for simplicity) in a single billboard 
2. Russian intelligence can also see the billboard and have unlimited computing power 
3. Langley will deliver the message in the future and there is no contact between the operative 
and headquarters (Langley) implying only basic cryptographic skills for substitution and 
transposition required 
4. The operative can only decrypt with pencil and paper 
5. Ciphertext is vulnerable to brute force when 
a. Single substitution step OR 
b. Single transposition step 
The questions to be answered: 
i. 
What is the minimum number of decoding steps (substitution/transposition) to thwart 
brute forcing? 
ii. 
What is the minimum number of keys that must also be distributed on the billboard? 
AND 
iii. 
If the operative was compromised, what additional countermeasures could be employed 
(i.e. masking)? 
Important terms: 
Substitution ciphers – where a plaintext character is replaced by another character and the position of the character is 
preserved 
Conventional substitution – utilizes a standard Vigenère tabula recta for encryption/decryption requiring only a key 
Unconventional substitution – the decoding tableau (tabula recta) is altered requiring both key(s) and the modified 
tableau  
Transposition ciphers – where all plaintext characters are unchanged BUT may change position; a key is optional 
Key – the fundamental component used in a cryptographic algorithm that may transform plaintext into ciphertext or 
ciphertext into plaintext 
Masking – a destructive and irreversible encryption process that removes characters 

[[page 2]]
Page 2 of 3 
 
Summary of Decryption Steps 
 
Decryption sequence 
Number of keys and/or deciphering tableau 
Vulnerable to brute 
force 
Single 
Step 
Substitution 
Conventional polyalphabetic: 1 key 
Unconventional polyalphabetic: 1 key plus tableau 
Yes to all 
Transposition 
0 if self-explanatory, or 1+ if more difficult 
Yes due to plaintext 
being scrambled 
Double Step 
Double substitution 
Conventional polyalphabetic: 2 keys 
Unconventional polyalphabetic: 2 keys plus tableau 
Yes due to 
fundamentally being 
a single substitution 
in aggregate 
Double transposition 
2+ keys if multiple algorithms 
Yes due to 
fundamentally being 
a single transposition 
in aggregate 
Substitution then transposition* 
Conventional polyalphabetic: 1 key (special case) or 2 keys 
Unconventional polyalphabetic: 2 keys plus tableau 
Yes* for special case 
No 
Transposition then substitution* 
Conventional polyalphabetic: 1 key (special case) or 2 keys 
Unconventional polyalphabetic: 2 keys plus tableau 
No 
 
Special Case Double Decryption Steps 
Substitution then transposition (1 key) – the key would both provide the substitution and 
transposition algorithm (i.e. 7-5-7-5-7 could indicate odd characters shift 7 and even characters shift 
5 and then rearrange to a matrix of 7-5-7-5-7). If the Russians were able to infer either substitution 
or transposition from the key, then the corresponding substitution/transposition could be brute 
forced. 
Transposition then substitution (1 key) – this is a special case scenario where the ciphertext is also 
the substitution (conventional) key after transposition. The plaintext is recovered after the 
transformed ciphertext is used to decode the original ciphertext with conventional substitution 
decryption methods (XOR, Vernam, OTP, Vigenère tabula recta, running key, etc.) 
Ciphertext: 
 
 
KRYPTOS 
Transposed ciphertext: 
RKYOTPS 
(conventional substitution decrypt) 
Decoded plaintext: 
 
THABAZA 
This could possibly result in “The Baza (cuckoo-hawk)” as a codename. From the table above, the 
decryption steps that would best thwart brute forcing and has the minimum number of keys is the 
special case scenario of transposition then substitution to decode. 
Masking 
Unlike substitution ciphers which replace one character for another, masking is an irreversible 
process that removes characters without fundamentally changing the position of the plaintext. The 
destructive nature would also imply that this would be done at the plaintext level. For encryption, 
this would be done first, and for decryption it would end up as some form of concealment as some 
English character statistics would be altered. If it were applied to the ciphertext or intermediaries, it 
may compromise the integrity of the ciphers and plaintext in its totality. 
 
 

[[page 3]]
Page 3 of 3 
 
Codenames (Nicknames) 
In addition to masking, having a codename would also provide an extra layer of protection if it was 
referring to the name of a target or asset. For example, TRIGON refers to Aleksandr Ogorodnik during 
the Cold War. 
Conclusion 
The crux of the Moscow Billboard problem lies with the number of encryption steps and the quantity 
of keys that also need to be delivered. When the quantity of ciphers is increased, the number of keys 
may also increase. With a single billboard, it becomes increasingly difficult to include the keys and/or 
deciphering tableau without garnering the attention of Russian Intelligence. 
If the analysis of Moscow Billboard is analogous to the K4 section of Kryptos, then the encoding of K4 
would be masking, substitution, then transposition. Conversely the decrypting steps of K4 would 
then involve: 
1. Transposition of ciphertext to produce the substitution key 
2. Substitution decryption using transposed ciphertext 
3. Analysis of masked plaintext 
Generally speaking, the method being described is a form of asymmetrical public key cryptography 
where the user has to reassemble the decryption key from transforming the ciphertext to then apply 
a substitution decryption process. 
To decode manually, this would require a circular process of transforming K4 ciphertext then 
decrypting K4 from the transformed substitution key. Fortunately, Jim Sanborn did offer two words 
for a partial crib: BERLIN and CLOCK. If the Moscow Billboard steps are used the K4 ciphertext 
characters NYPVTTMZFPK can be decrypted with MUYKLGKORNA using a standard polyalphabetic 
substitution (XOR, Vernam, OTP, Vigenère Tabula Recta, running key, etc.). 
