[[page 1]]
Borrowed from:  
http://www.thekryptosproject.com/kryptos/pok/strata.php  
 ....I wanted to do the piece outside the entrance to relate to the one on the inside [strata in the front and courtyard].... 
Theres a line of stones, jagged stones coming up out of the ground. And those lines are parallel to each other from the 
air.... And if you go up in your helicopter, and you look over on the inside 
, theres the same outcropping on the inside, 
all lined up. So it appears as if the agency was built on top of that. And had been there way before the agency, been there 
for millennia. I like that idea, because it made it appear as if what I had done was there predated the agency, it was like a 
temple site, you know, some sort of a, religious temple site where secrets were always there, and they just kept piling it 
on, you know, like they built, well, lets build our new one on top of here, and then well build our new one on top of that 
one, right? And so in, in the stratas of granite, in the front of the building, uh, I inserted between some of the stratas a 
thick piece of copper plate. Like an ore, between slabs of stone. Or a page, pages of a book. And that ore, that copper 
plate was perforated with Morse code. The simplest code. -- Compiled from NOVA Transcript from Elonka.com  
 What JS is describing here, essentially, is what’s known in Hebrew as a “Tel”. These were settlements 
built atop the ruins of previous settlements. Over the millenia, these grew to look like mounds.  
Also, based upon the shadow of a “T” creating a cross (“+”), I believe these are instructions on how to 
solve K4.   
Then, there’s the religious symbolism; again, a cross. “temple site where secrets were always there, and 
they just kept piling it on”. Is this meant as a double entendre?A tel (“Tell”) and a heaping of layers onto 
the cross-shaped solution?  
There’s another clue hidden within the message found in the Morse code solution. The “e’s” (the 
repeater dots) also point to a cross:  
The "e's" from the morse code  
2,7,3,2,2,5,3,1,1  
2,7  
3  
2,2,5  
3,1  
1  
Xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx   
27  
3  
25 (2)  
31  
1  
27 degrees 3 minutes South 25 degrees 2 minutes 31 seconds West  

[[page 2]]
Xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx    
27°3'S, 25°2'31"W  
Points to a giant cross ("+") in the Mid-Atlantic rift zone (Must zoom in.).  
Xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx   
“They used earth’s magnetic field.”   
[A magnetic field has a north pole and south pole.]   
A shadow has an “equator”, which divides the north and the south, again alluding to the “+” shape 
required to solve K4.  
K4’s secrets were always there!  
“(io) sors ?  
  
Eben Klaskin   
  
