[[page 1]]
Dear Kryptos Enthusiast, 
I was asked to look for clues that may be in two Sanborn sculptures located in my 
hometown of Cleveland.  They are both located on the campus of Cleveland State 
University, and are close enough that a visitor can virtually see one from the other.  So 
with 1 hour on the parking meter and a partial role of film, (I found out upon arrival that 
my usually stocked camera bag had been pilfered by some locals within the household) I 
tried to gather as much information that I could pass on to you, the Kryptos group 
member. 
The pictures were taken from 10:35-11:35 am on June 30, 2003 (for you sun 
shadow calculators out there). Lenses included a fixed 28mm, a 35-105 zoom, and one 
macro lens picture. 
I have uploaded the pictures into the files part of this page.  So if you print this 
letter you can follow along the picture descriptions.  
Sanborn Spinning Top Sculpture
ClevTop1.Jpg is a picture of the sculpture looking directly North West toward 
the entrance of the Business School.  It was taken with a 35 mm lens.  This is where the 
text by Adam Smith begins.  It continues on, and on, and on, and on… for seven panels.  
I am in the process of trying to get the text from the reference librarian, as I didn’t have 
time to get it all down.  But it basically reads after the second panel “Bla, bla, bla.  Bla, 
bla. Bla…  I’ve made all the pictures hopefully detailed enough that you can read the 
whole thing if you assemble all the pictures. When one reads all the Bla, bla, bla you get 
the sense that Sanborn didn’t really intend for anyone to truly read it from beginning to 
end. It all turns into brain drivel within a panel or two.
ClevTop2 is from the entrance of the school looking south.  The top is about 8.5 
feet tall and the script is about 4 feet tall. Notice the symmetry of architectural and 
sculptural lines.  Notice the dark band of brick, this will become more apparent in a later 
picture. 
ClevTop3 is looking South West toward 18th street and the Law School. 
ClevTop4 is the same only a bit more detailed.  This picture was taken with a 28 
mm lens.  Notice the shadows from the hazy summer sun on the sidewalk. 
ClevTop5 is looking northeast toward the Law Library. This is one of my favorite 
views.  Notice the round windowed structure of the Law Library.  This is where the 
second Sanborn sculpture hangs, as you will see in later pictures.  You can actually stand 
under the sculpture in the Law Library and look out and see this spinning top sculpture 
from there.  I think this picture is architecturally dramatic and the sculpture picks up the 
architectural lines and displays them prominently.  You will also see that the front of the 
business college is a collection of arches, which is also mirrored in the sculpture. 
ClevTop6 is looking north toward the front of the Business College again. Notice 
the walkway over 18th street.  This is where I shoot the overhead picture of the sculpture 
later. 
ClevTop7 is a picture of the Top itself standing inside the circular sculpture.  
There was and interesting play of the shadows on the circular pavement.  Of Course the 
sun went behind a cloud just as I shot this photo. The shadows on the pavement were 

[[page 2]]
much more dramatic 1/10 of a second earlier. The inscription at the top of the top is 
repeated three times “Metaphors spin easily from the mouths of economic philosophers.” 
ClevTop8 is a picture from within the sculpture and again the shadows make an 
interesting and readable mirror pattern on the sidewalk like most of the outdoor 
sculptures of Sanborn. 
ClevTop9 This is a shot from the three-story glass walkway over 18th street 
looking southwest.  You will notice that the top is in fact open at the top and serves as a 
funnel to the ground.  Perhaps there is a drain for all the Northeast Ohio rain to pour 
down into below.  We had thunderstorms throughout the night and morning and this 
picture taken at 10:45 show that drainage and evaporation occurred quite well.  This is 
interesting in that Sanborn placed this circular sculpture in the middle of a circle itself. 
Does this seem like a compass rose? The largest dark ban points directly north.  If the 
circle script of the sculptor represents the United States, then the Top would or could 
represent Langley.  (It could also just as well represent Florida).   But, here is your 
compass rose theory people. 
ClevTop10 is a picture looking North with a 28mm lens.  Notice the front of the 
Business college round windows are echoed in the sculpture in front of the college.
ClevTop11 is a picture looking North again with a 105 mm lens
ClevTop 12 is a picture looking North west from across 18th street near Euclid
ClevTop13 is at the corner of Euclid and 18th street showing the park location and 
more of the business college 
ClevTop14: What’s This!  Eureka!  I found myself in the script.  This is the one 
picture that I messed up the f stop program changing lenses. But look at the mysterious 
picture it created.  First look at ClevTop6 and zoom in on the bottom end of the script.  
You will see the last word doctor.  I didn’t even notice this. My intention here was to take 
a macro picture to give you some perspective of the metal letters and thickness of the 
strip.  I put my hand into the picture for more perspective and Woa! Look what it says!  
“HAND OF THE DOCTOR”! Is that spooky.  (I’m a doctor if you haven’t figured that 
out) Actually it happened as pure fun, but it did jump out at me as I was framing the 
picture.  Don’t think I’m making something personal out of the message; I just had to 
have a little fun with this. (Though I looked, I also didn’t find my address in one of the 
panels) 
ClevTop15 For all you remotely interested, this is a picture of me hugging the 
sculpture as if I’m the wealthy donator of the artwork to the college. (NOT). 
Sanborn Law Library Sculpture
LawLib1 is the view you get of the Sanborn Sculpture as you enter the Law 
Library Rotunda.  It is composed of 7 panels on the north side (seen here) I will call them 
the “Washington Panels”
LawLib2 and another 7 panels on the south side seen here.  I will call these 7 
panels the “Antiquity Panels”  The panels are posted on two sides of a circular floor 
boundary of the rotunda of the library. 
LawLib3 is a view North of the 7 “Washington panels”. This is from the second 
floor looking down on them.  You will notice that each panel has the left side of each 
panel turned up like a page to be turned. 

[[page 3]]
LawLib4 is a view from the second floor toward the “Antiquity Panels” I will call 
them.  I use a 28mm lens to show the leafing of the panels in the foreground. If you could 
look directly through the panel third from the right and straight through the building you 
would see the Spinning top sculpture across 18th street.  I actually lined up a shot on the 
floor below to show that I could stand under one sculpture, and see another, but there was 
a truck parked on the street in front of it at that time. I would be looking past the 
computer terminal to the right of it to view the other sculpture.  That would be looking 
southwest. 
Law Lib5 shows a detail of the first “Antiquity Panel”  
Law Lib 6 shows detail of the last two “Washington Panels” 
Each panel left side is turned up and makes it difficult to actually stand in one place to 
read any panel, as you will see in photo LawLib5.  
Each panel represents a major law decision in time.  I didn’t have the time to 
write the whole text in my notes. Again, I wonder if Sanborn really expected anyone to 
read all these panels.  
The Seven Antiquity Panels from left to right in order are: 
Athens 594 BC Law of Solomon: Written in Greek  (see LawLib5)
Rome 450 BC Lex Duodecium:
Constantinople 533 AD: Institutiones Justaniani
Mainland China:  600 AD The T’Ang Code
England 1215 AD: Magna Charta
Iroquois Nation 1450 AD: The Iroquois Book of the Great Law (Written in phonetic 
Indian language)
Canandaigua New York 1872:  State of New York vs. Susan B. Anthony: 
The Seven Washington Panels on the North Side from left to right are: 
Washington DC 1972: William Henry Thurman vs. the State of Georgia vs. State of 
Texas
Washington DC 1954: Brown vs. Board of Education (Topeka KS)
Washington DC 1948: McCullum vs. Board of Education Justice Hugo Black “
Washington DC 1928: Olmsted vs. US Justice Louis D Brandeis
Washington DC 1927: Whitney vs. California Justice Louis D Brandeis “
Washington DC 1803 Marbury vs Madison:  Justice John Marshall “ (LawLib6.jpg)
Washington DC 1896 Plessy vs Ferguson Justice John Marshall Harlen” (LawLib6.jpg)
I asked the reference librarian for a complete text of both sculptures.  She said she 
would get back to me on this.  
There is another Adobe Acrobat file I made of what the library has laying out for 
its patrons about the artwork in the building.  It is labeled. Llflyer.pdf

[[page 4]]
Discussion:
It is interesting that the Spinning Top sculpture has seven panels and each Law 
Library collection contains seven panels. I don’t now what significance is given of the 
number seven.  
I didn’t see a cornerstone for either building in my brief visit.  
I didn’t get the feeling that these sculptures were designed to give clues about one 
another but were really placed to accent the buildings to which they were adorned. And 
furthermore, I really didn’t get the feeling that there was some hidden clue for the 
Kryptos sculpture (sorry all). I think these pieces were made individually for their placed 
location.
  If there is something else you would like me to discover about these sculptures 
on a personal visit, please let me know, as they are both close by me. 
My meter’s running… 
Richard Nelson, MD.
