[[page 1]]
 
M1  A big clue is in plain sight 
 
Jim said a big one is in plain sight. Well if that's so, it's in the Kryptos ciphertext. Part of the 
clue was already found several years ago. But it was not understood as Jim and Ed expected. 
Jew-Lee found that if K3 was arranged in 31 columns, it can be read diagonally, from NE to SW, 
OHNNY NASH. Then Paul Kiesel found on the next diagonal, I SEE. Imagine for a moment the 
enormous task of adjusting the plaintext of K3 to get these 13 characters aligned as they are in 
the ciphertext (and we will see that there are many more messages in plain sight and 
concealed in K3 and throughout Kryptos). This is not just random. 
 
 
 
Although the J was lost, the message is loud and clear: Singer - Johnny Nash, Song - I can see 
clearly now. If in the final part of K3 it asks: CAN YOU SEE ANY THING Q? So we must listen to 
what things Johnny can see. 
This is one of my favorite songs. I have enjoyed it hundreds of times. So what things can 
Johnny see? I can see all obstacles in my way… OBSTACLES. Here is that rainbow I’ve been 
praying for… RAINBOW. Look all around, there’s nothing but blue skies… BLUE SKIES. But in 
principle BLUE SKIES wins, because there is nothing else. So, 4 + 5 characters. What's in K4 with 
4, 5 or 9 things? The 4 rows! We will number the rows of K3 and K4 as Jim does in his chart #3, 
from 1 to 14 (not from 15 to 28 as I had done before). How many B are in row 11? Only 1 and it 
is one of the 4 letters of K4 in row 11. How many L are in row 12? 3. How many U are in row 
13? Only 1. How many E are in row 14? Only 1. So, we should slide the rows between them to 
form BLUE vertically? And in which column do we align BLUE? Are there only 3 simple 
transpositions possible? 
 
Tests:  
 
1) In the Antipodes sculpture, Jim put the Kryptos code almost 2 times, but in this order: K3, 
K4, space, K1, K2, K3, K4, K1 and part of K2. So if we place rows 1 and 2 of K1, as they are in 

[[page 2]]
Kryptos, after K4, as they are in Antipodes, the magic appears. We can see SKY in columns 25 
and 26. 
 
 
 
 
We must align BLUE in column 25. Several years ago, in an interview with Jim, Elonka asked 
him if the mistakes were deliberate. Jim answered yes. But more important than which the 
mistakes were, is it more the orientation or positioning of those letters that’s use full there. 
The character that causes the IQLUSION mistake is precisely the K in SKY and it is marking the 
position of where to align BLUE, hence its importance. We find a logical explanation for the 
first deliberate mistake. 
 
2) Jim in his chart where he shows how K1 and part of K2 would have been encoded, puts 4 
marks on K1. An arrow to the right in row 1 of the ciphertext, another arrow to the left in row 
2, and 2 checks marks under a K in row 1 and a Y in row 2. He was giving us the clue to pay 
attention to the Ks and Ys and to move row 1 to the right or row 2 to the left so that we find 
SKY. He didn't mark an S because it would be too obvious. If he checked the first one, we 
would read SKY and the second is precisely the S of our SKY. Here is the ambiguity of whether 
we should align BLUE on column 25 or 26. With PALIMPCEST as the title Jim seems to explain 
that IQLUSION was an inadvertent mistake. But honestly, I don't think so. I believe that Jim is 
fairly and cleverly doing the opposite. This is not the original chart where Jim wrote the 
plaintext, the key, and encoded. We will see that Kryptos is an immense puzzle, very carefully 
elaborated, almost character by character. I think this is a chart built years later just to give us 
additional clues. If it were true that he put PALIMPCEST as the key, he encoded wrong, realized 
the mistake and corrected it... where would be the first place where he should correct the C 
for the S? Of course in the title. By leaving the C in the title he is confirming that IQLUSION is a 
deliberate mistake, just as he told Elonka. 
 
3) Nicholas LaMey did a study with ciphertext in a 30 column arrangement. Below is a detail of 
the area under study: 
 

[[page 3]]
            
 
 
OHNNY and I SEE are vertical from N to S, now BnLUE also appears vertical, but that n 
interleaved in BLUE is the n of LINE diagonally from NE to SW. TEST also appears diagonally. If 
we had not realized with the song, here is the clear instruction, in correct English, LINE BLUE! 
TEST! It is not possible to solve K4 if we do not align BLUE. 
 
4) When we begin to pay attention to the 3 L of row 12, we see that one of them is the 
sequence ULB, BLU reversed. But there is no E in row 12. Also in row 12 there are 2 sequences 
SO, OS reversed. It is curious that the sequences are reversed only in row 12, just random or 
intentional? In the U of row 13 is the LU sequence, and shifting row 13 forms the YPT 
sequence. At the E of row 14 is the sequence UE. All these sequences belong to BLUE or 
KRYPTOS. It will be possible to form more than one BLUE with simple movements and thus 
obtain the lost plural… SKIES? Daniel Ankuda showed that taking the characters of K2 and 
jumping according to the days of the months in order: 31, 28, 31, 30… we got I SEE ONE, I only 
SEE ONE blue? Jim commented that it was strange to him that no one had tried running it 
through all possible shifts. Was it an indication for someone to test the 31 x 31 x 31 = 29,791 
shifts and find the 3 possible BLUEs? Should we also reverse row 12 to read BLU and OS? 
Should we swap rows 12 and 13 so that KR appears above, YPT in the middle and OS below? 
Since row 13 has only one L and row 12 has 2 U, we have 10 possible simple K4 transpositions 
to align BLUE: 
 
The first 3 with each of the 3 L in row 12 
 
 
 

[[page 4]]
 
 
 
 
The next 3 with row 12 reversed to be able to read BLU and OS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The next 2 swapping rows 12 and 13 to have the KR, YPT and SO sequences in the correct 
order 
 

[[page 5]]
 
 
 
 
Finally the last 2 interchanging rows 12 and 13, with row 12 reversed, to have the KR, YPT and 
OS sequences in the correct order and to be able to read BLU and OS 
 
 
 
 
 
If we had a choice, this last K4 transposition would be the preferred one. It complies with 
having BLUE aligned, it has the KR, YPT and OS sequences in the correct order and with OS in 
the correct sequence, when reversing row 12 the U falls exactly in column 25 and another 2 
BLUE can be read in zigzag, recovering the lost plural of SKIES. 
Ed said he built some dead ends. 9 are enough for me. There is another LINE BLUE test 
elsewhere on Kryptos that I will show later. 
 
This M1 message was a bit long, but it´s a big clue in plain sight! And there is much, much 
more! 
 
Jose Luis 
 
