[[page 1]]
 
M10  Starting to solve K5 with the instructions of WW 
 
Who knows  the exact location? 
Only WW. This was his last message x 
38 degrees  57 minutes   6.5 seconds North 
77 degrees    8 minutes    44 seconds West x 
 
As we saw in the previous message M9, it is very likely that K5 is a visual puzzle. Starting from 
the Original Matrix or Plaintext Matrix (P), and following the instructions that WW left in his 
last message, we will have to move rows and columns of the P Matrix and the Matrix System. If 
we carry out the correct movements, we will obtain in the P Matrix the representation, by 
characters, of the image chosen by Jim for K5. We will also get clues to solve K4 and K5. Jim 
has been clear that while it is possible to solve K4 without having solved K1 - K3, K5 cannot be 
solved without K4. If we are correct and K5 is a visual puzzle of the P Matrix, we need all the 
plaintext, also the one in K4. But since K4 is just 11% of the P Matrix and we already have part 
of the K4 plaintext, we can try to start solving K5. 
 
In previous messages we saw what were the movements associated with several of the WW 
instructions, and their tests or confirmations. In the M6 message we saw how 38 degrees is 
related to solving the anagrams ZENITH in North Kryptos and DEBRIS in South Kryptos, both in 
rows 3 to 8. The proofs are that the doorways THE PENNY RED UK and SET HANDS arise, in 
addition to other clues. In message M8 we saw how 6.5 seconds and 8 minutes are related to 
folding the Matrix with axis 6 and a half columns from the right and 8 columns from the left, 
obtaining TEST in the first fold and POSTTEST and DEAN in the second fold as confirmations. 
Finally in the previous M9 message we saw how 77 degrees and 44 seconds are related to 
shifting columns 7 and 4 vertically to place an A and an L  in column 7, rows 2 in both North 
Kryptos and South Kryptos, and an E and an O in column 4, rows 5 in both North Kryptos and 
South Kryptos, to complete the weird duo DELTA - HOTEL. These latest moves involve 
characters from K4 and confirm Jim's announcement that to fully resolve K5 we need to have 
all the plaintext from K4. It remains then to discover what are the movements linked to 57 
minutes. I have discovered two possible clues linked to rows 5-7, but perhaps other clues exist. 
The first one in P Matrix shown below: 
 

[[page 2]]
 
 
If we focus on the SUPERMEN clue in column 10, we see how in row 7 there is an A. We could 
interchange rows 5 and 7 so that SUPERMAN appears. Should we do it only in South Kryptos or 
also in North Kryptos? 
 
The second clue linked to rows 5 to 7 is in C matrix, shown below: 
 

[[page 3]]
 
 
Starting from column 11, row 4, we see diagonally, from NE to SW, a misaligned CLUE. We 
could align it NE to SW by shifting rows 5 to 7 one place to the right. Or we could align it 
vertically from N to S by shifting rows 5 to 7, respectively, 2, 3, and 4 places to the right. Or we 
could align it diagonally from NW to SE by shifting rows 5 to 7, respectively, 3, 5, and 7 places 
to the right. Or is it just a clue that we can shift rows 5 through 7 across each other and relative 
to the Matrix? Should we do it only in North Kryptos or also in South Kryptos? There are many 
possible alternatives, and I have probably overlooked other interesting ones. Therefore, in this 
message, more than movements tested and with confirmations as in the previous messages, 
we show possible movements, until we reach a movement without solution. It would be very 
good if other members of the Group explore new alternatives and find test that confirms 
which are the correct movements. Perhaps also when K4 is resolved, new clues will emerge for 
K5. 
 
It is reasonable to think that the operative in the field tries to follow, as strictly as possible, the 
instructions that his boss WW left him in his last message. So we will carry out the movements 
in the order of the coordinates and we will see to what point Kryptos continues to guide us as 
before. First then the instruction 38 degrees, the anagrams ZENITH and DEBRIS of rows 3 to 8. 
The new P Matrix or 38P is the following: 
 

[[page 4]]
 
 
As we had seen in the M6 message there are some clues such as THE RED GATE, perhaps in 
allusion to THE GOLDEN GATE and SAN FRANCISCO, as we saw in the M4 message possible K4 
plaintext from position #52. On the other hand POSTTEST, which will appear once we have 
made the folds in column 25 and between columns 8 and 9, is not altered by the 38 degrees 
and 57 minutes movements, since they are from row 9 in North Kryptos to the row 2 in South 
Kryptos. But SUPERMEN in column 10 has already been altered by the 38 degrees movement, 
as well as DlLTg and HcTEs clues for the 77 degrees and 44 seconds instructions. A NE to SW 
diagonal AGE has also emerged between columns 28 to 26 and the rows that currently have 
the fifth to seventh position. Is this clue that we have to pay attention to when executing the 
57 minutes instruction? The sequence MENAM (MEN MAN) near the PUT ON IT cluster may be 
the clue to first swapping SUPERMEN for SUPERMAN by exchanging the fifth and seventh place 
rows. The WHEN and TILT clues also appear. When to tilt CLUE? When to tilt AGE? Before or 
after SUPERMEN? 
 
Let's first perform the SUPERMAN movement on both North Kryptos and South Kryptos. The 
new first Matrix P or 57P1 is as follows: 
 

[[page 5]]
 
 
AGE has changed its tilt and two new clues appear: ADD IT and HERE, which appear to be 
related, in the extreme columns of the Matrix. With this movement important clues emerge in 
the corresponding Matrix C or 57C1. Matrix 57C1 is as follows: 
 

[[page 6]]
 
 
On the one hand PENNY RED appears again, now in a cluster with one of the misspelled 
QUEENs. If we still had not found the Matrix System that we discussed in the M6 message, 
here again it gives us the clue about THE PENNY RED that we found in said message, in the P/C 
Matrix, after solving the DEBRIS anagram. With QHEEN there are no doubts that it refers to the 
PENNY RED of UK and not of USA. In addition, NEAR PEER appears in the cluster. And 
coincidentally PENNY appears in exactly the same position as in the P/C Matrix that we saw in 
the M6 message. All of this does not appear to be just random, it is intentional, and it would 
confirm that we made the right move. 
 
Now let's study how we can shift the rows that are in the fifth to seventh positions. After 
several tests, with shifts 4, 2 and 0 to the right, in both North Kryptos and South Kryptos, the 
following is the 57P2 Matrix that I have found most likely: 
 

[[page 7]]
 
 
AGE appears tilted, now from SW to NE. As we saw in the M8 message, folding the right side 6 
and a half columns from the edge, we got TEST and NEDLES. An E was missing and the D was in  
column 18 and the eighth row. Now the missing E appears and arises NEED, but in the place 
where the D should be there is an S. And the S as it is in the eighth row, it should no move in 
the 57 minutes instruction. A YES appears but LOSE continues. Will these be the correct moves 
for 57 minutes? Let's see which is the Matrix that arises from the first fold at 6 and a half 
columns from the right edge corresponding to the 6.5 seconds instruction. Matrix 6.5 P is as 
follows: 
 

[[page 8]]
 
 
As we saw in the M8 message, when executing the 6.5 seconds instruction, TEST appears. 
Now, although the E has arisen from the NEDLES error, an S has also arisen. If they are the 
hands of a clock, we could interpret that the S is the center of the clock, NEED is the large 
needle and LES the small one. As we also saw in the M8 message, Jim expressed surprise that 
we didn’t include the rotation of the pool in the 3D modeling. He gave us the clue that 
something must be rotated in Kryptos. Something similar happens with the clue: passing 
Kryptos through a washing machine, flip and rotate. And here we have found it. We should 
execute the SET HANDS instruction rotating a certain area of the 6.5P matrix with the center at 
that S. The ends of the S could be indicating the direction of rotation: clockwise, the same as 
that of the pool. But if we do that, and we choose to rotate the square marked with light green 
and light blue, with N, A, S and O in its corners, AGE will not be aligned with POST, when we 
execute the instruction 8 minutes, folding the left side to 8 columns from the edge. In order for 
AGE to be aligned with POST and POSTAGE appears, we should rotate, with the center in the D 
of NEEDsLES, the square marked with light blue, with E, U, S and X in its corners. But then 
spare the S in the middle of NEEDLES. The same happens if we interpret that it is singular: 
NEEDsLE and is the compass needle. Thus, the D is the center of the NEEDsLE, but the s 
remains. It seems that we have not made the right moves. In addition there are several 
uncertainties. Should we do the rotation now, or after we have executed the remaining WW 
instructions? Should we rotate a square, or remove 1 or 3 or 6 characters from each corner 
and rotate an 8-sided area? For the moment, and taking into account that at the center of the 
sixth row we can read HEY USE D, let's rotate the square of 11 x 11 characters with center in D. 
The new 6.5PR matrix is the following: 
 

[[page 9]]
 
 
Nothing has emerged to confirm, as on previous occasions, that we have made the right move. 
We only have AGE correctly located. When we fold the left side with the 8 minutes instruction, 
POSTAGE will pop up. Now it corresponds to make the shifting of column 7 according to the 
instruction 77 degrees. As we saw in the message M9, we must shift column 7 in order to 
locate an A in the second row of North Kryptos and an L  in the second row of South Kryptos. 
Let's find then an A and an L separated by 14 positions in column 7. But there is only one L  in 
the sixth row of North Kryptos and one A in the third row of South Kryptos. There is neither 
one located in rows 12 to 14 that could be complemented by the K4 plaintext , when we solve 
it. This confirms that we have not correctly followed WW's instructions in his last message, 
possibly in the 57 minutes instruction. Many alternatives remain open. In what order to play 
the SUPERMEN and CLUE clues? Are other clues linked to rows or columns 5 to 7? We have to 
run both clues in North Kryptos and South Kryptos as we did? 
 
As we saw in the M6 message, after resolving the DEBRIS anagram, THE PENNY RED UK 
appears in the P/C Matrix, one of the first postage stamps in the world. 
 

[[page 10]]
                                                                     
 
 
When we fold 8 columns from the left, instruction 8 minutes, POSTAGE will appear instead of 
POSTTEST (message M8) having replaced TEST with AGE with the rotation. If we correctly 
follow the instructions of WW, it is likely that QUEEN, VICTORIA, REGINA, RED or some 
combination of these, and also ONE PENNY, will appear. That POSTAGE appears in the middle 
of the P Matrix is not a problem, because we will probably also have to cut the rows and move 
them around, or fold them by rows, according to the marks on the petrified tree. The character 
representation of this postage stamp would be the solution to the visual puzzle Jim has 
referred to, as well as his preference for Matrix-based coding systems. 
 
All these discoveries that we develop in this series of 10 messages, are linked to K4 and K5. I 
invite the members of the group to explore the K4 algorithm that we saw in messages M4 and 
M5, to find a way to modify, expand or apply it in a different way; so that in addition to 
correctly decoding BERLIN and NORTH E as so far, let's manage to decode CLOCK, the two EAST 
and surely the rest of K4. I also invite you to explore the movements of K5, so that 
confirmations appear, as has happened until now, and that we can continue to advance in the 
resolution of K5. I think we are very close to solving both K4 and K5. I am optimistic, with the 
Group's Collective Intelligence, in a very short time, we will achieve it. 
 
Jose Luis 
 
