[[page 1]]
 
M2  Recovering the Original Matrix 
 
Based on my research, Jim began divulging his Original charts in the July 2007 PBS 
NOVAscienceNOW video. His charts #1 and #3 are seen in the video. Perhaps he showed the 
other charts to reporters, but those don't appear clearly in the video. 
 
When Jim divulged the clue BERLIN in November 2010, he also divulged the chart where he 
encoded K1 and part of K2. Since it does not have a number, we will name it chart #0. In it the 
K1 rows 1 and 2 are numbered, and the first 6 rows of K2 from 3 to 8. Divulging charts #0 and 
#3, Jim practically gave us the Original Matrix, as several members of the Group speculated at 
the time. In April 2006 Jim made sure we knew a character was missing at the end of K2, when 
he told Elonka that IDBYROWS was not correct. Group members worked quickly and found the 
correct plain text XLAYERTWO (as we will see later, IDBYROWS is as important a clue as 
LAYERTWO). 
   
What is the Origin supposed to be? It should be the Original plaintext, from it the keys and 
algorithms are applied and the ciphertext is obtained. Jim clearly shows us in his Original 
charts #0 and #3 that the Original Matrix has 31 columns and 28 rows. So, in principle, we will 
build the Original Matrix with the first 2 rows of K1. We'll leave out the N from IQLUSION like 
Jim did. Next the 12 rows of K2, leaving out the C of MAGNETIC like Jim did. We will name this 
part of the Original Matrix: North Kryptos or NK. Jew-Lee continued chart #0 for rows 9 to 14, 
considering the correction of XLAYERTWO, the O is located exactly in column 31, row 14. 
 
 
 

[[page 2]]
For the second part of the Original Matrix, we will use Jim's Original #3 chart. Since Jim 
numbered the rows from 1 to 14 (not from 15 to 28 as I did in the beginning), we will do the 
same. We will name this part of the Original Matrix: South Kryptos or SK. 
 
The Original Matrix is as follows: 
 
 
 
Tests: 
 
1 As we can see in column 19, row 3 of NK can be read from N to S: BEoRLIN! Once again it is 
confirmed that Kryptos contains the keys, clues and instructions to solve it (Kryptos on a 
billboard), but time passed and no one found those words on their own. It's reasonable to 
think that when Jim decided to start releasing clues, he started with the ones we should have 
found first. But how do we know where to locate BERLIN on K4? We already know that the 
sequence EIOYTE (lucid memory?) appears in the ciphertext of K3. In column 11, row 9 of NK 
can be read from N to S: ELY. In column 12 row 3 of KS it can be read from NW to SE: OIE. Is 
this enough? I think not. In addition, with an English text arranged in a matrix, many words of 2 
and 3 letters are formed randomly (alphabet soup). That is why I have only considered words 
with 4 or more letters or that form sentences with some meaning. But the fact is that BERLIN is 
easier to recognize in the Original Matrix, only after leaving the letter C of MAGNETIC outside 
the matrix. 
 
In column 10, row 13 of NK can be read from N to S: SUPERMEN (The 2 references I have found 
are NASA Astronauts and SERPENT CROWN characters. Or is it a clue to generate or use the 

[[page 3]]
word SUPERMAN?). In column 14, row 1 of SK can read: TIE A FLEA. Are them just Easter eggs 
or real clues? 
 
In column 5, row 1 of SK can be read from N to S: LAW and then a 4 x 4 matrix with 2 HINT. 
Another Easter egg? A matrix to apply the HILL Cipher (the extra L)? 
In column 22, row 8 of SK can be read from NW to SE: MERGE, with the oddity that the final E 
changes course from SW to NE, as if forming an inverted check mark. And perfectly aligned is 
another MERGE from EMERGED. This clue was essential in building the Matrix System Jim 
refers to, so we can go from one doorway to the next. I have probably lost, in this and the 
remaining matrices, other valuable clues. It would be great if you can find new clues! 
 
2 After giving us the BERLIN clue Jim said: “I dangled the clue BERLIN, but I also divulged, or 
gave images of my Original decoding charts, the ones that I… well, actually, for me, they were 
encoding charts. And I think once the Krypto-philes study it in a forensic manner, there might 
be revelations in there. So in a way, I gave more than just BERLIN. I think I gave other 
information as well." 
 
So let's analyze, in a forensic manner, the charts, and what Jim said and how he said it. As I 
commented in the M1 post, Jim on his chart #0 on K1 appears to make an inadvertent mistake 
in IQLUSION. Now in K2 it appears an unwanted messiness by leaving out of K2 the C for 
MAGNETIC in row 5. I think those are deliberate mistakes to give us those clues. Apparently he 
wrote the K2 plaintext and omitted the letter C. Then he wrote the ABSCISSA key repeatedly 
and finally coded. At some point he realized the mistake and added the missing C. But... when 
did he realize the mistake? If he realized the mistake after coding, which is what would justify 
not having to redo the entire chart, he was extraordinarily lucky, he also omitted an S from 
ABSCISSA! If he had realized this before writing in the key, I think most of us would have taken 
a blank page and started over. Either way, leaving the C out, everything starts to fit together, 
as we will also see in the other matrices. Also in chart #0 there is a vertical mark in column 18 
of K2, very close to the limit with column 19. Jim is signaling us to look there and precisely in 
column 19 row 3 is the B of BERLIN. Also, as we will see later, the boundary between columns 
18 and 19 is important. 
 
As for what Jim said, the most obvious is: "a forensic manner”. It directly leads us to analyze in 
K2 the trio CSI (Crime Scene Investigation) left outside the matrix in chart #0. He also named 
those Original charts, so that we could associate those with the Original Matrix. But I don't 
think the charts are the Originals. Kryptos is a huge puzzle, carefully done, almost character by 
character. As we will see they have not used a bit of stego (stenography) in K4. They have used 
a lot of stego everywhere in Kryptos. It is not credible that he wrote the plaintext, chose the 
keys, encoded and done. I think these charts were created long later, perhaps in 2007, to give 
us these clues that allow us to recover the Original Matrix and the Matrix System. Jim had a 
tongue slip, first he called them decoding charts, and then he corrected himself by calling them 
encoding charts. That indicates that them are more recent charts and not the Originals. 
 
 
Finally, which character(s) to leave outside of K1 is ambiguous. Jim confirms in his chart #0 that 
K1 occupies only rows 1 and 2, it does not number the N of IQLUSION. We left out of row 2 the 
N of IQLUSION like Jim did? The problem is that the Q of IQLUSION is in column 26 and not in 
column 25, and the K does not fall below the S to form SKY in the ciphertext. We leave out of 
row 1 the C of ABSENCE, because row 1 appears in Kryptos with 32 characters? 
 

[[page 4]]
 
 
We introduce a space in column 1, row 1, as it appears in the Antipodes sculpture (I made a 
tiny breach in the upper left hand corner). And we leave out row 1 the N of ABSENCE and of 
row 2 the N of IQLUSION. In this last alternative, the S and K of SKY would be in column 26, not 
in 25. 
 
 
 
And we would double the total of simple transpositions of K4, to align BLUE, as we discussed in 
M1. I have worked with the second alternative, but we must consider the others as well, until 
we have something conclusive. Either way, from the many confirmations that we will see later, 
I believe that the matrix thus constructed is the Original Matrix Jim refers to, minus some 
adjustment in rows 1 and 2 of K1. 
 
It's all for now but there is much, much more! 
 
Jose Luis 
 
