[[page 1]]
M8  Folding and unfolding Kryptos 
 
In a CNN interview in Nov 2005, Jim said: “There are a lot of doors to go through to get the 
meaning of the code. Every time you enter… one doorway you might… in the distance see 
another door. You go through that doorway and then you go through another doorway, and it 
unfolds as it's deciphered." That is exactly what we are finding in the Matrix System. Doorways 
that lead us to new instructions, clues and doorways. But before continuing that trail of 
doorways, let's take a step back. We will not use in this message the new matrices that we 
arrived at with the ZENITH and DEBRIS doorways (M6 message), but we will start from the 
initial 4 Matrices. They are: 
 
   
 
 
In the Original Matrix or P Matrix (M2 message) we find the clues BERLIN and SUPERMEN 
among others. Confirmation with DONE that this is the correct trail. And the first doorway with 
the two MERGEs, which lead us to the next two merged matrices (M6 message). 
In the second Matrix or C Matrix (M3 message) we find a large number of clues such as OHNNY 
NASH, I SEE, LINE BLUE TEST, SKY that tell us how to make the transpositions of K4 (M1 
message). The logical explanation for the deliberate mistake in K1, because the K in SKY is the 
code for Q in iQlusion. The DIAWINFBN pattern (M4 message), that suggests how to continue 
expanding the K4 algorithm. The two QUEENs with mistake and MATE that suggest us how to 
merge the matrices P and C as in a chessboard (M6 message). And the idea of being under 
duress (M3 message) because if "Tee IS YOUR POSITION" then you are literally between a 
STONE and a SITE HARD, that is, you are between a ROCK and a HARD PLACE. In the M3 
message I forgot to highlight two clues that may be useful from now on: a misaligned CLUE and 
an AGE. 
 
So with the 2 MERGEs, 2 QUEENs and MATE doorways, we build the matrices that complete 
the initial system, merging the matrices P and C (M6 message). The P/C and C/P matrices are 
as follows: 
 

[[page 2]]
  
 
 
Again we get various instructions, clues and doorways. In the P/C matrix appears the character 
THE GOD MAID from the novel “The Flute of the Gods” by Marah Ellis Ryan. Also a nest-shaped 
NEST and TEAR, of which there are many in the novel. The NASA SEAL and the logical 
explanation for the deliberate mistake in K3 appear, because the first A in NASA is the A in 
despAratly. And HOT AIR, from the K3 plaintext. 
The C/P matrix gives us the clear instruction with DO IT, to perform the 2 anagrams of ZENITH 
and DEBRIS, which are the doorways that lead us to the new matrices (M6 message). 
As we see the instructions, the doorways and the vast majority of the clues are in correct 
English, and some lead us to the others. This cannot be just random; it would be like the same 
person winning the lottery every month. This is intentional and corresponds perfectly to what 
Jim said in Nov 2005. 
 
From the 2005 DC Trip Notes we also have that "Sanborn expressed surprise that we didn’t 
include the rotation of the pool in the 3D modeling." As if he wanted to indicate that rotation 
is important. If we think about that clue, on the one hand it doesn't seem to be very useful. 
There are only two possible directions of rotation: clockwise and anti-clockwise. That clue was 
given long before CLOCK was released in Nov 2014. Perhaps it was to introduce the idea of a 
clock. And maybe he did it too so we know that something needs to be rotated in Kryptos. 
 
One word Jim used in Nov 2005 was unfolds. If there is something that unfolds, it is because at 
some point it was folded. In charts #1 and #3 that Jim divulged, several vertical folds appear 
near the edges of the matrices. Jew-Lee did an excellent job on her site The Kryptos Project, 
recreating those charts and noting in which columns the folds would be. In chart #1 there is a 
fold that is not clear if it is between columns 11 and 12 or between 12 and 13, counting from 
the left. There is another fold between columns 11 and 12 counting from the right. In chart #3 
there is a fold in column 6 from the left side, and another fold in column 7 from the right side. I 
did all the folds suggested by Jim in his charts, such as axial symmetries in the 4 initial matrices 
and only in the last fold, that is, with axis in column 7 from the right side, column 25 in our 
numbering, we obtained the following result : 
 

[[page 3]]
        
 
 
Let's remember the main hidden texts that Matt found in Kryptos plaintext (M6 message): YOU 
DID IT and TESTING. It would seem that every time we reach a portal on the right trail, a DONE 
or a TEST arises to confirm it. By performing axial symmetry with column 25 as axis, we obtain 
TEST perfectly centered with edge 18/31. DINE, TIDE, SEE ARK and DUO also appear. The latter 
confirming what we already intuited from Jim's charts: there are two vertical folds to be made, 
one symmetry on the right side and one on the left side. In his chart #0, Jim put a vertical mark 
on column 18, very close to the border with column 19. He was indicating to us, in addition to 
the BERLIN clue in column 19, the edge of the first fold. Column 18 remains, column 19 goes to 
last place. Now MERGE appears as a correct check mark and its change point, the letter G, 
continues to mark the axis of axial symmetry. 
And we leave the big surprise for last. Some misspelled NEEDLES. As Jim suggested to us, 
something will have to rotate in Kryptos. In the new C/P matrix (M6 message) SET HANDS 
appeared, suggesting that the clock should be set. We still don't know if these are the hands of 
the clock, or if it is the needle of the compass. If it were the clock, what are the hands? Are 
they lined up in NEDLES, or are NEDLES the big one and TEST the little one? Will it be 
misspelled or will the missing E appear? Nor do we know the size and shape of what we must 
rotate, nor its center of rotation. We will discuss that later, in a future message. 
Let's now look at the folded C matrix: 
 

[[page 4]]
        
 
 
TENT, COAT and CD RACK are formed. We see a TREE and that AGE is approaching the center. 
The P/C and C/P folded matrices are as follows: 
 
   
 
 
In the P/C matrix they appear as possible clues FBI, and if there is any doubt about which FBI 
we are talking about, the F is for FEDeral. Nearby is the CIA. Also BURN. FUEL and FRAY appear 
in the C/P matrix. And also, in case we had not realized that the anagrams that we had to do 
were 2, DEBRIS and also ZENITH, DUO appears together with DO IT. 
 
I began to test what would be the fold to make on the left side. If we do the symmetry with 
axis between columns 8 and 9 this is the result for P matrix: 
 

[[page 5]]
        
 
 
If before we had TEST to confirm the correct fold, now we have POSTTEST to confirm it, and 
nothing less than the DEAN, perfectly centered with POSTTEST to validate it. Also appear IS 
SHE and another TEAR. 
C Matrix, with fold in 8, is as follows: 
 
        
 
 
In the double fold C matrix, DANE, another FUEL, WENT and SEAT are formed. And we 
recognize FUME. 

[[page 6]]
The matrices that complete the double fold are: 
 
   
 
 
CHARGE has been formed in the P/C matrix. In the C/P matrix I have not been able to 
recognize something new. Surely in these and in all the matrices I have lost valuable clues, so it 
would be very good if other members of the Group find clues and share them. 
 
It always caught my attention how Jim numbers the rows from 1 to 14 twice, instead of 1 to 
28. Will the columns also have to be numbered in a different way than what we are using? The 
ZENITH and DEBRIS portals are identically located in rows 3 to 8 (M6 message). In the new 
matrix C we saw THREE and next a cluster of 6 E (M6 message). Three and 8 E letters, if we 
consider the 2 of thrEE. Again 3 and 8. We do the first fold in column 25 and the second fold in 
the border between columns 8 and 9. If for the first fold we number the columns from right to 
left, we could say that the first fold is at 6 columns and a half from the edge, 6.5!, because it is 
in the middle of a column. The second fold is 8 columns from the edge, 8. We have found a 
logical explanation to the mysterious SIX POINT FIVE of the coordinates of K2! We always 
consider Digital Interpretation as the opposite duo to Analogical. But in this context, we must 
interpret the coordinates of K2 literally as digits: (3 and 8), (5 and 7), (6.5), (7 and 7), (8), and (4 
and 4). (3 and 8) correspond to the duet of anagrams of rows 3 to 8 of the ZENITH and DEBRIS 
doorways. (6.5) and (8) correspond to the vertical folds that we saw in this message. 
 
In the next message we will see how the duo DELTA and HOTEL is related to (7 and 7), with (4 
and 4), with the DYAHR cluster and with K4. We will see later the elusive (5 and 7). Finally 
many pieces begin to fit, one with another, in this wonderful puzzle of 870 pieces. And there is 
still more! 
 
Jose Luis 
 
