[[page 1]]
M9  Following Chief Williams Webster's instructions 
 
Who knows  the exact location? 
Only WW. This was his last message x 
38 degrees  57 minutes   6.5 seconds North 
77 degrees    8 minutes    44 seconds West x 
 
It is very reasonable to think that the operative in the field, linked to Kryptos, pay close 
attention and follow as exactly as possible, the instructions that his Chief William Webster 
gives him in his last message. He's the only one that knows. To solve K4 and K5 we must do the 
same. 
 
According to what we have seen in the previous message M8, the movements to be made in 
the Original Matrix or Plaintext Matrix, are linked to the numbers of the last message from 
WW. In message M6 we saw how the DO IT instruction led us to solve two anagrams: ZENITH 
in North Kryptos, rows 3 to 8 and DEBRIS in South Kryptos, also rows 3 to 8, according to the 
repeated row numbering chosen by Jim in his charts. At that time I did not relate rows 3 to 8 
with the 38 degrees with which the last message starts. But when we found in the M8 message 
that the fold that we had to make for TEST to appear, was 6 and a half columns from the right, 
and for POSTTEST and DEAN, it was 8 columns from the left, there is no doubt that the 
numbers of the last message, refer to rows and columns in the Original Matrix. It is on the 
other hand what one of the Morse K0 messages suggests: DIGETAL INTERPRET… Digital 
interpretation, as digits, not as tens and units. 
 
We have already found how to use the digits 3 and 8, 6.5 and 8 in the previous messages. This 
time we will see that 77 and 44 are linked to the columns of the Original Matrix and to the 
weird duo DELTA - HOTEL that we saw in the M7 message. 
 
The Original Matrix, less than 97 characters from K4, is as follows: 
 

[[page 2]]
 
 
It took a long time to find it, but once found there is no doubt what the instructions of WW in 
relation to the digits 4, 4, 7 and 7. Diagonally, from SW to NE, starting at column 3 row 6 in 
North Kryptos, DELTA appears misspelled. And repeating exactly the same pattern of location 
and errors, in South Kryptos appears HOTEL misspelled. The two wrong characters for each 
word are in columns 4 and 7. The four wrong characters then correspond to the digits 4, 4, 7 
and 7 interpreted as columns and must be corrected. 
 
TEST 
 
1  Columns 3 to 7, where DELTA and HOTEL appear to be corrected, are precisely the columns 
where the DYAHR cluster is located. Taking into account that Y, A and R are raised with respect 
to D (DELTA) and H (HOTEL), the idea of a RAY (YAR written backwards) between D and H 
arose. In message M7 we explored the search for some antipodes (an imaginary RAY that 
passes through the center of the earth reaching diametrically opposite parts of the earth), with 
HOTEL in the North and DELTA in the South. Which allowed us to find the HONOLULU and 
Okavango DELTA antipodes. This confirmed that the DYAHR cluster was related to DELTA and 
HOTEL. Now again we find in the same columns 3 to 7 of the DYAHR cluster, the weird duo 
DELTA - HOTEL, misspelled for now. 
 
2  The 3 raised characters YAR of the DYAHR cluster are in columns 4, 5 and 7. The possibility 
has been handled that this indicated a vertical shifting of any of the 3 columns. Now we have 
the test that columns 4 and 7 must shift vertically in order to locate an E and an O, separated 
by 14 positions in column 4 (4 and 4). And locate an A and an L, separated by 14 positions in 
column 7 (7 and 7). But in the Original Matrix there are no characters that meet this condition, 

[[page 3]]
in K1 - K3 plaintext. So some of those letters will be come from the K4 plaintext. It is also 
logical to think that the movements should be made in the order of the last message from 
WW. For example, the last movement would be the shifting of column 4, after having 
performed all the movements between rows and folds that we have analyzed. Others will be 
columns 4 and 7 to shift, not the ones we now have in view in the Original Matrix. 
Jim commented that it was possible to solve K4 without having solved K1 - K3. But K5 cannot 
be solved without K4. This confirms that if we consider these movements of rows, columns 
and folds of the Original Matrix, like the puzzle announced by Jim as K5, to make the vertical 
shifts of columns 4 and 7, we will need at least one or two characters of the K4 plaintext. We 
can also do reverse engineering. Assume that we have already solved K4, try to solve K5, and 
according to what we find and need, get the clue of which could be the characters of the K4 
plaintext necessary in K5. But let's not get so far ahead. 
 
3  In an interview Jim said: “But as a visual artist, I like to rely on systems that include visual as 
well as digital material that can be deciphered by machines. It´s also well-known that I did use 
some matrix codes Ed gave me, and I have also designed visual systems for encoding, which 
are much harder for cryptographers to crack because they’re individualistic. I have left 
instructions in the earlier text that refer to later text”. On the one hand, Ed has confirmed that 
K4 is an algorithmic code: “In analog systems, as coded in Kryptos, the key is the algorithm”. 
And on the other hand, Jim clarifies that having solved K1-K3 helps us solve K4 and K5 because 
he has left instructions. All of that is exactly what we are finding here. The last message from 
WW, these are the instructions to put together the visual puzzle of K5, which is one of the 
visual systems that Jim likes as a visual artist, and one of the systems he has designed. Starting 
from the Original Matrix or Plaintext Matrix and following WW's instructions, we must move 
parts of the matrix, as if it were a puzzle of 870 pieces. If we make the right moves, we will find 
the doorways and clues that will help us solve K4 and K5. And as a final result, we will obtain 
the representation, by characters, of the image chosen by Jim for K5. The most relevant 
doorways and clues we have found so far are: LINE BLUE TEST, BEoRLIN, SUPERMEN, MERGE, 
NASA SEAL, THE GOD MAID, DO IT, DEBRIS, ZENITH, THE PENNY RED UK, SET HANDS, TEST, 
POSTTEST, DEAN, NEDLES. Almost all the words in correct English (except BEoRLIN and 
NEDLES). Some in the Original Matrix and others in the Matrix System. This cannot be just 
random, the probability of all this happening by chance is negligible. This is intentional and 
confirms that we are on the right trail. Some of these doorways and clues have already led us 
to others. For example MERGE took us to THE GOD MAID, DO IT, DEBRIS and ZENITH. DEBRIS 
took us to THE PENNY RED UK and SET HANDS. ZENITH took us to NEDLES. It is the doorways 
trails path that Jim announced: “There are a lot of doors to go through to get the meaning of 
the code… every time you enter… one doorway you might… in the distance see another door. 
You go through that doorway and then you go through another doorway, and it unfolds as it’s 
deciphered”. 
 
In the next message, ending this series of ten messages related to discoveries that will help us 
solve K4 and K5, we will see how the elusive digits 5 and 7 can be interpreted, to perhaps solve 
the error in NEDLES and rotate a part of the matrix that it contains it, by way of setting the 
hands on a needle clock or changing the course in a compass. 
 
Jose Luis 
 
