## word/document.xml
 
 VIRTUAL -LY-IN-VI- SIBLE 
 Callback to the K2 SIBLE crib clue and DYAHR rotation clue. SIBLE is properly SIBYL, and this would refer to this character in a very specific book of the Dryden’s translation of the Aeneid – Book VI. Her role is as a guide to the underworld and she tells the future through acrostic puzzles on leaves. Additionally, SIBLE = DYAHR reflected rot-1, with the L=Y in this clue. 
 S -1=R 
 I -1=H 
 B -1=A 
 L = Y 
 E -1= D 
 
 Code: Establishes the primary rot-6 pattern for the first two rows of K4. 
 
 T IS YOUR POSITION – specific verse from the very same Book 
 “'T is here, in different paths, the way divides; 
 The right to Pluto's golden palace guides; 
 The left to that unhappy region tends, 
 Which to the depth of Tartarus descends;” 
 The Sibyl describes to Aeneas the branched path after crossing the quagmire Styx. A split path to Elysium or Tartarus , the heroes or the damned. The HYDRA guards the path to the Underworld, and a golden bough/branch opens the path to the celestial half of the sphere. 
 
 Code: This is important for the next clue, which decrypts part the last line (4 rows of 24) of K4. 
 
 DIG E TAL INTERPRET - A - T = U 
 
 Call-forward to the K4 crib, AETCKAR is Russian for “crib” Not coincidentally, so are the last 7 letters of K4, if you make a critical U-1=T change. Result: DID I GET IT AT KLIU? 
 
 Code: Establishes the use of rot-1 as well as the K3 keynumber in pairs (14) and (25), possibly (036) as well 
 
 
 
 SHADOW FORCES 
 SHADOW (PHORCYS) 
 A greek god known as the Old Man of the Sea, who gives evasive answers beneath the flickering flame of the Pharos lighthouse . His children, all monsters, populate the underworld as shades alongside the HYDRA. SCYLLA and CHARYBDIS (the whirlpool and the rock, obvious corollaries to Kryptos screen and the whirlpool with it’s narrow space between them) are among these. 
 
 Code: Establishes the use of phonic word play, which may be important in Berlin Clock (amber l in clock, for example) It may be that Kryptos IS the “berlin clock”, the second one, with it’s flickering sunlight in the central “L”, much like Mengenlehreuh and it’s flashing “seconds” light. 
 
 SOS 
 The absolute most basic and one of the earliest code signals to be sent by flame. 
 
 Code: Establishes the running theme (lighthouse flame) present in every interpretated theme of Kryptos , including the K3 plaintext. 
 
 RQ 
 Call-forward to the K4 crib R=Q, last letter of K4. It ends with a question. 
 
 Code: Help establish the running “ray columns” present in K4 plaintext. 
 
 LUCID MEMORY 
 (LOOSE)-ID MEMORY – ID BY ROWS after X LAYER TWO (aka the ciphertext ) 
 
 FAR-ROWS=PHAROS 
 NEAR-ROW=NERO 
 
 Code: None, unless I’ve missed that there’s something in the transition of the CT to the PT . Establishes the important “identities” used in the K4 plaintext, that is the “multi-headed beast” alternatively HYDRA, Scylla and the Beast of Revelations . 
 