## word/document.xml
 
 Note: I have been treating this research as largely exploratory in nature, following the associations where they lead and basing conclusions on them rather than fixing on a particular hypothesis because artistic themes don’t enjoy the same provability that encryption and decryption do. That said. 
 　 
 It’s all fine to have this theory of hidden themes and keywords such as PURPLE, WINGS, CAESAREAN and RAY, but an equally important and missing link is the CIA itself. This made me wonder if the puzzle at play isn’t associative in nature, describing a location, an area, or an exhibit. So I took those keys and looked around (virtually), starting with the obvious CIA seal with its eagle and compassrose .. 
 　 
 This is located in the OHB (Original Headquarters Building. Curious as to the actual color of the seal, since it’s depicted in black, deep blue and purple elsewhere, I found it…. It’s black. But looking at the images, I noticed something else…. There’s a bunch of columns by it. In some images, these columns are black, in others purple, depending on the amount of light. A relationship between Kryptos themes, K1 and a specific location between the areas of the entire Kryptos Exhibit which ranges from the Morse on one side of the building to the Sculpture and beyond on the other. The seal is on the floor before the columns. 
 　 
 This would seem to be the association There you have black-to- purple color shifting columns, rays (the compass rose) and caesarean (cardinal directions, of caesarean or Roman origin). The eagle’s head has no wings, but the building does, eastern and western. 
 
 I’ve uploaded two pictures to the photostream , one of the columns in black, the other in purple. Christian Science Monitor has a similar photo but with the purple in a more vibrant hue. 　 
 
 On November 3, 1959, Eisenhower testified to the value of war and peace time intelligence gathering while laying the cornerstone to the OHB. 
 On November 3, 1990, Sanborn dedicated the Kryptos Sculpture to intelligence gathering at the NHB. 
 　 
 Moreover, I *believe* (cannot seem to confirm anywhere) there is a plaque at this location from the Eisenhower administration where a cornerstone ceremony was performed for the OHB. (Also unclear is the actual location of the cornerstone. The north-eastern corner?) 
 
 Conclusion? This could lead off on a separate trail that seems more K4 oriented. More to the point, specifically in looking at K4 is the arrangement of words on the CIA Seal, two phrases in opposite directions from different points around the rim as on the Lotus/Alabaster Chalice with it’s inscription to the North Wind. 
 
 Conclusion 2: It may be required to look at K1 to K3 in a different way, mapping out a circle with "T" as the central position, either on that same 24 character arrangement that I'm using, or another shift. 
 
 