## word/document.xml
 
 This post should be considered part of a set that starts with Visual Markers and Aerostat-Hourglass-Satellite. 
 　 
 Making sense of the misspellings as cryptograms , phonemic, puzzles and otherwise : 
 　 
 K1 - "Eye Clue's Son" - Father & Mother: Hyperion + Theia = Helios 
 　 
 K2 - "GR UU" - Greek double-U more specifically the Uncial double-U styled symbol, aka the Omicron or O - Helios/ Helius 
 　 
 K3 - "PER AT L Y" - Word puzzle requiring plaintext and ciphertext - insert P & R in the spaces at DY A HR and you have - HYPERHON. 
 ~ Hyperion is the Titan father of Helius . The cryptogram with two Hs refers to the two being mistaken for each other, often translated in other cultures as Sol. 
 　 
 "Details emerged from THEMIS..." – Titan, sister 　 
 Between subtle shading (Themis's blue aether ) and absence of light (Hyperion) lies the nuance of the Eye Clue's Son ( Helius ). The "eye" is below the middle of Kryptos , through which the central rays pass. 
 　 
 This leaves…. 
 (TX) Can you see anything? (Q) – Can you see anything between T, X & Q? K4: Yes – SOL and PRNG-KSS. 
 　 
 Hyperion  was the Greek Titan of heavenly sight. Effectively disappears from mythology and is replaced by his son Helius . He was the titan of watchfulness and sight, oft used interchangeably with his son as "Helios Hyperion" 
 　 
 Theia  was the Greek Titan of blue aether sight, and Greeks believed she enabled them to see with eye rays of light. Sister and wife of Hyperion. There’s a neat parallel here between Cherekov’s Reaction and cosmic rays from the sun. 
 　 
 Helius /Helios  was a lesser Titan, representing the physical embodiment of the sun as his sisters Selene and Eos did with the moon and dawn. A god of the sun and eyes, as well as travelers. 
 　 
 Themis  was the Greek Titan of Divine law, sister of Hyperion, mother of Prometheus. Embodiment of divine law, she is the scales of justice, represented on the Titanic Greek zodiac as Omega/Omicron…. At 270 degrees. 
 　 
 Prometheus  – a lesser Titan, known in mythology for stealing fire from the gods and giving it to man. Specifically stealing fire from his cousin Helious and giving it to mankind. Man would one day ascend to the heavens themselves under the watchful eye of the CIA 
 　 
 Putting it all together, you could say that Prometheus tricked them all. He didn’t JUST steal fire, but the watchful eye of Helius as well, and gave the heavens to mankind. A gift that embodied in a history of reconnaissance balloons up to satellites that now fly under the names of Titan and Sputnik "the travelling companion" 
 　 
 Names such as Hyperion, Helios, The Giant, and Titan as well as a host of American, royalty and eagle symbols were all popular with titans of the aerostat balloon industry such as Samuel Archer King, Thaddeus Lowe, the Montgolfier Bros. and Eugene Godard. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Settings 
 Legion Eyes 
 spwild@yahoo.com 
 