## word/document.xml
 
 If you’ve ever examined the Russian alphabet, you’ll notice that it is very similar to English even though English is derived from Latin and Russian Cyrillic scriptderived from the Glagolithic . 
 
 Progression is the reason for this – both scripts have shared roots in Greek uncial script, and step back even further to the Phoenicians. They are not 
 
 The color of those roots is PURPLE and they’re surprisingly well-lit. 
 
 Setting aside the obvious reference to the anthropomorphized sun-god in the Phoenix for now, Phoenicia was an ancient civilization noted for many things, but most relevant to the subject at hand…. the development of the first purple dye – Tyrian purple from the Murex mollusc . The name Phoenix itself, in the Phoenician tongue, literally means Tyrian Purple . 
 
 Incidental t ranslation s to Russian: 
 
 "Tyrian purple" = n-y-p-n-y-p 
 "Crib" = [ A ]ETCKAR 
 
 ~ If you’ve seen the K4-image of the Satellite, you’ll note that this string of text bears a nearly complete resemblance to the "T" section if you refer to the letters that aren’t the "U" 
 
 "Interpret at U" indeed. 
 
 (Note: Word does not like the large squiggly A, so it’s in brackets. 
 Takeaways are two: 
 Theory 1 : The Satellite represents the BALANCE (at Jim’s time) between the Soviet Union and the Union of States of America (Union being the name of a Lowe Aerostat) each being one wing of the satellite, and the K4 code & K4 reflected code being their superficial resemblance. Unfortunately, this may mean there is a decryption process involving the Cyrillic. 
 Theory 2 : The Kryptos sculpture, when viewed at a proper angle under the right light, reveals the plates in a coloring of purple and at least two images. The readable CT is American, the reflected CT is Soviet. I’ve speculated in the past that the famed image of the Pyramids seems to be there, but this could as easily be a Range of Mountains. This is K1-K2. K3-K4 bears the image of an amber circle at night because of the reflecting pool. 
 “For purple mountains majesty. For amber waves of grain…” ~ America the Beautiful 
 Note: Typewriter-97 Purple is deep on the backburner for now as it seems to bear no connections to any of this. 
 