## word/document.xml
 
 Approaching the New Headquarters Building, you are presented with the series of Morse-inscribed stones along the walkway, with the notable feature of some being sandwiched slabs, which appears to be an important detail. Solution of these stones grants a series of words that I am going to assign strict contextual meaning to, that context being the entire courtyard exhibit between the NHB and the cafeteria pavilion. Specifically, I see the following context: 
 When you begin, T IS YOUR POSITION, entering the courtyard from the NHB. This “T” shape is observed in a bird’s eye view of the campus. To one’s left, the Kryptos sculpture is vislbe , and before you the rest of the courtyard that Sanborn designed. Achieving LUCID MEMORY, cleared of all but your keywords, you begin orientation at your current position *behind* the Kryptos sculpture. Observing from this reversed side of Kryptos , one can trace a virtual line of SHADOW FORCES with the finger, a figurative DIGETAL INTERPRET-AT-U that begins at the top-right of Kryptos and ends at YR on the bottom left. These are not meant as a form of decryption, but to orient the eye to look at the ENTIRE image at a distance too far to really read the code. When the light and shadow plays on the sculpture’s ink, a secondary image is revealed: a VIRTUALLY INVISIBLE trio of pyramids similar to the iconic image of the Egyptian pyramids. 
 The remaining keywords SOS, matches to the morse stone that is a sandwiched trio of slabs – a formation which is also present in the courtyard, in front of the cafeteria. Examining the shadowy underside of this formation, it becomes clear that there is a *skylight* in the ground. 
 You n ow have a frame of reference for a new keyword before you even begin secondary decryption and attempt Kryptos itself – PALIMPSEST based on the dual-image Kryptos sculpture and a secondary clue involving the courtyard. 
 ** 
 With the aid of more skilled code-breakers, you find that Kryptos is divided into rough sections, and that these progressively open a series of seemingly unrelated text and misspelled words that can also be seen as descriptive of the courtyard, with the spelling intended to draw one’s attention to them. 
 Three misspelled words: IQLUSION, UNDERGRUUND, and the oddly mangled DESPARATLY 
 When one examines the skylight in context, there is an ILLUSION presented, that of an UNDERGROUND part of the cafeteria but one that is in actuality completely DISPARATE from the cafeteria. 
 
 A new picture that begins to fit the context of the deciphered paragraphs emerges. You have a skylight that is hidden between subtle shading (shadow) and absence of light (void). By following the coordinates to the geomagnetic marker that was originally left at the Berlin Wall Monument, you would find that there is much more elevation to the area than appears at a glance…. b ased on the readings from that marker. Examining that skylight more closely with a candle or flashlight, you *might* glimpse some of the wonders within that underground facility. The Hall of Archives , where three shadowy figures once met and rejected the secrets of Kryptos , perhaps? 
 What would you see? That is the Q. 
 
 