## word/document.xml
 
 my body of exploration on this subject is pretty large in the posts that I've sent out, so here's a condensed, more simplified version, point A to Z. 
 JS created Kryptos with the stated "theme" of intelligence gathering, and indicated that he considers it primarily a work of art. I decided to delve into that determining the artistic nature of that theme with an emphasis on a heuristic approach as much as possible to avoid "cloud in the sky" interpretation and exploration of the visual clues in the puzzle. This led me heavily into WWII for awhile until Sharp Jim highlighted a flaw in my thought process with some comments on Enigma. I stepped back and decided to treat it as a real clue rather than an end-game, and decided to start following some other paths that I hadn't really explored. Typewriter-97 aka Purple, led me to see if there was anything going on with that. I'd already picked up an obvious thematic thread in RAY, and there's several major and minor visual clues on Kryptos to play with. 
 CLUES: 
 1. DY A HR 
 2. Central L - The working copy of Kryptos that you see everyone working with is not what you see on Kryptos . The material is REFLECTED, and the outlying L is actually at the center of the scupture . 
 3. The Eye - Below the central L, there's a spatial disturbance similar to DY A HR in a circular shape. I've interpreted it as an Eye. 
 4. The misspellings. 
 RAY: 
 ~ The raised letters on Kryptos side. 
 ~ The Tableau. Rays visual effect of the alignment of the table's shifting letters. 
 ~ K1: Palimpsest - With writing, there is a visual layered effect like rays. 
 ~ K2: Abscissa - A natural ray. 
 ~ K3: 0362514 - Cartesian coordinates of a diagonal ray. 
 While I was angling around with Purple and trying some failed decryption, Com Nav mentioned the first letters of the words in K1 as an anagram. I put it together as T IS AST (aerostat) BALLOON. Things started clicking at that point. Some research on balloons and the CIA went down a fascinating path, and the naming of the balloons with an emphasis on the Titans, Giants by famous balloonists through history made me think that Kryptos might have to do with the evolution of aerial recognizance under the CIA from the original Hyperion balloons to the TITAN and Soyuz satellites. This led me to play with the idea of "shifts" as meaning a steganographic shaping of K4 - Balloon, to Hourglass (JS quote), to Satellite. A shift over time. Startlingly, the Balloon matched up with the Morse Stone as a visual marking system. T IS YOUR POSITION. 
 The Titan byplay made me look into that at the same time as Purple, and eventually I got the following thematic thread. 
 PURPLE: 
 K1 Palimpsest - There is a series of four famous palimpsest known as the Purple Uncials (letters). These are illuminated manuscripts, an interesting play on Kryptos . 
 K2 Abscissa - 270 degrees, the Kryptos -side absicssa , is Purple on the Artist's Color Wheel. 
 K3 0362514 - After the year 0, 362 AD and 514 AD are significant dates relating to the Nicaea (as in the biblical council) which has purple context, as well as Symmachus of Burgundy (purple) and the death of Christ 
 At this point, there was starting to become a clear progress over time of "gods and goddesses" transforming, like the balloon to a satellite. Aither of the heavens became Hyperion Helios of Light, to the God of Light. 
 This makes obvious a Kryptos theme - transformation of letters in a cyclical fashion - plaintext to ciphertext and back. Also a third and somewhat final idea emerged - CAESAR/EAN 
 CAESAR/EAN: 
 ~ The ciphers are caesarean in nature. 
 ~ K1 Palimpsest: The purple vellum of the Purple Uncials, like Caesar's fabled toga, restricted them to the Roman emperors. Palimpsest is a synonym for pentimenti , features noted on an artistic work under raking light (Ray King’s Light). 
 ~ K2 Absicssa : abscissa - "to cut" aka a Caesarean section 
 ~ K3 0362514 - Same as Purple. Also, Caesarean "columns" aka columnar transposition. 
 These are all fine and well as three separate key themese , but need to be tied together. In study, it becomes clear (to me) that the three themes indicate interplay three different peoples at the time. 
 Purple aka Phoenicians (by literal name) 
 Caesarean aka the Roman Caesars 
 Ray aka the Greeks and their consistent history of transformative gods. 
 The interplay between these three peoples led to several relevant things: 
 ~ The current Christian church, represented by the God of Light. 
 ~ The American and Russian Alphabets 
 The latter is overtly relevant to Kryptos , the former to the underlying themes. It also pulled up an interesting idea: Phi Phenomenon, the optical illusion of purple circles moving on rays clockwise. There's some other conclusions drawn on this, particularly now that you've pulled in Antikythera / Kythera . The reflective pool (reflection being back and forth, through time as well as positional arragenement . 
 
 This is the end of this summary document, but by no means the end of the search as it appears to be missing (at the time this was written) the crucial link of the Egyptians, which circles the entire theme back around to King Tut’s tomb, and the very first item seen under the light of Carter’s RAY – the Lotus/Alabaster Chalice known as the King’s Wishing Cup which bears an inscription in a circle around the rim, two quotes reflected in opposite directions. 
 x 
 