[[page 1]]
For more than 20 years Jim Sanborn has screened and responded to thousands of inquiries 
related to his KRYPTOS sculpture at CIA Headquarters. In 2010 the artist set up a website
to handle this work but it seems that the site has encouraged an overwhelming number of 
frivolous or debasing or hostile entries. This screening process has required a lot of time, 
energy and money and Jim cannot continue to do this in the same way.
For the above reasons the “www.kryptosclue.com” website has been shut down. To filter 
the number of KRYPTOS enquiries, insure a constructive dialogue, and defray the expense 
of the screening process, the following fee system has been established:
If an inquirer would like a short personal response via e-mail to their K4 solution or their 
decryption process a $50 fee will be charged. Mr. Sanborn will attempt to respond within 
approximately one week or at his earliest convenience. The fee shall cover an exchange of 
no more than two back-and-forth emails. Additional e-mails shall require an additional fee. 
Mr. Sanborn reserves the right not to respond to any e-mail in his sole discretion. If he
chooses not to respond the fees will be returned. The content, detail and length of Mr. San­
born’s response shall be determined solely by him.
PLEASE NOTE: THAT JIM SANBORN WILL NOT INTENTIONALLY REVEAL 
CLUES OR A SOLUTION TO THE REMAINING UNSOLVED K4 SECTION.
This fee also covers requests for single copyrighted photos of KRYPTOS for small publi­
cations and interview requests. Payments must be made using “next day” Western Union 
money transfers (available internationally at many outlets, banks, and online). Once Mr. 
Sanborn has been sent the MTCN (Money Transfer Control Number) by email he will read 
the email inquiry and either respond or have the funds returned (please provide contact 
information where funds can be returned). If the payment is not received, assume that the 
email sent will not be seen by the artist.
Important! Please place the words “Western Union Kryptos” in the email subject line. The 
artist resides in Piney Point, Maryland in the United States.
kryptos@earthlink.net
