[[page 1]]
I have inﬁltrated CIA headquarters in Langley, Va., on a top-secret
mission.
Okay, “inﬁltrate” might be an exaggeration. I spent several weeks
getting permission from the CIA media relations department. I
underwent a thorough background check. I am accompanied by several
CIA oﬃcers at all times. So I’m not quite Jason Bourne.
Still, I have made it inside CIA headquarters, and I am, in fact, on a
mission. I’m on a quest to decode Kryptos, one of the most famous
unsolved puzzles in the world. In 1988, the CIA commissioned
Maryland-based artist Jim Sanborn to create a sculpture for its
This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. To order presentation-ready copies for distribution to your colleagues, clients or customers visit
https://www.djreprints.com.
https://www.wsj.com/articles/the-online-community-obsessed-with-a-cia-puzzle-11650686460
LIFE & WORK | IDEAS | ESSAY
The Online Community Obsessed With a CIA
Puzzle
Kryptos, a sculpture at the agency’s headquarters bearing a secret message in code,
continues to inspire a diverse group of sleuths after three decades.
Kryptos, 20 feet long and 12 feet high, stands in a courtyard at CIA headquarters.
PHOTO: JIM SANBORN
By A.J. Jacobs
April 23, 2022 12:01 am ET

[[page 2]]
expanding headquarters. The agency wanted to install some art that
would be relevant to its mission of cracking secrets.
The main part of Kryptos is a
wavy wall of copper about 20
feet long and 12 feet high. Into
the copper, Mr. Sanborn has
carved about 1,800 seemingly
random letters and four
question marks. It’s a code, a
secret message. No one knows the solution except Mr. Sanborn and
possibly a former director of the CIA. Kryptos was dedicated in 1990;
more than 30 years later, the code has not been fully cracked, even by
the CIA itself.
Granted, it has been partially cracked. In the 1990s, amateurs and CIA
staﬀers independently solved three of the four sections. When decoded,
the ﬁrst section of the sculpture contains a mysterious sentence from
Mr. Sanborn about “subtle shading and the nuance of illusion.” The
second section contains what seem to be GPS coordinates and hints
that something is buried. The third section is a paraphrase of
archaeologist Howard Carter describing his experience in 1922 of
peering through an opening to discover King Tut’s tomb.
But the fourth section, called K4 by fans, remains opaque. Over the last
10 years, Mr. Sanborn has given tantalizing hints, revealing that K4
contains the words “northeast,” “Berlin,” and “clock.” But so far it
remains unbroken. It’s just 97 letters, but they are perhaps the most
exasperating 97 letters ever written.
A few months ago, I joined an online community of thousands of
Kryptos obsessives. Several times a week, I get messages about the
latest theories. Maybe the code is related to Egyptian hieroglyphics? Or
Dante’s “Inferno”? The theories are endless and endlessly creative.
More than 30 years
later, the code has not
been fully cracked, even
by the CIA itself.
Sculptor Jim Sanborn, seen here in 2003, was commissioned to create Kryptos in 1988 and
still fields questions from would-be solvers.
PHOTO: THE WASHINGTON TIMES/ZUMA PRESS

[[page 3]]
There’s also speculation about what comes after K4. Mr. Sanborn has
said that even after all the sculpture’s codes are solved, there will still
be a further mystery. Perhaps a buried treasure? A combination to a
safe? No one knows.
Mr. Sanborn is clever, but what I really love about the Kryptos
phenomenon is the tenacity of the solvers. They’re still going at it 30
years later. It’s a diverse group—computer scientists, artists, doctors,
professional cryptographers—all united by this quest. What grit! Well,
some might call it an unhealthy obsession. But I prefer to see it as grit.
Before my ﬁeld trip, I post a message to the Kryptos community asking
what they want me to look for. I get a barrage of requests: Bring a
compass and see if it behaves oddly. Look for any shadows that are cast
on the sculpture. Look for weird markings on its bottom. Peer inside
any nearby holes.
On a summer Saturday, armed with my list, I pass through security and
enter the CIA’s main oﬃce building. It turns out that it’s a bit of a hike
to get to Kryptos. The Langley compound is huge and surprisingly
serene. There are lawns, elms and a koi pond. If not for the helicopter
from the war in Afghanistan displayed near the parking lot, it might be
mistaken for a high-end college campus.
We ﬁnally arrive at some glass doors that lead to a courtyard with red
patio tables and chairs. And there it is, in all its frustrating glory:
Kryptos. It’s smaller than I expected. In my mind, I had somehow built it
up to rival Stonehenge. But it’s also prettier than I expected. The
sculpture’s undulating shape is almost relaxing, and the copper’s
oxidized green tinge makes it stately. “Can I touch it?” I ask.
My tour guide—the CIA
historian Randy Burkett,
friendly but straitlaced, in a
black suit—nods yes. I run my
hand over the carved-out
letters. The copper is cold,
despite the warmth of the day.
Maybe it will relinquish its secrets to my touch, like when Spock puts
his hands over someone’s face. Sadly, there is no rush of images to my
brain.
Before my Langley visit, I emailed Jim Sanborn, and he agreed to an
interview. I was worried he’d be cranky, but he actually seemed open to
talking—at least to a point. Creating Kryptos wasn’t easy, he says. He
had to get lessons in cryptology from a retiring CIA agent. As for the
sculpting itself, “I went through 15 diﬀerent assistants, 900 jigsaw
blades and 12 Bosch jigsaws over two and a half years,” Mr. Sanborn
SHARE YOUR THOUGHTS
What kinds of puzzles do you enjoy trying
to solve? Join the conversation below.

[[page 4]]
says.
Thirty years on, he has mixed feelings about his most famous work. On
the one hand, he gets annoyed at the thousands of people pestering him
for clues or hints—some of them politely, some not so much. “I got
threatening mail, threatening phone calls, weird packages left at my
front porch that I had to open almost robotically,” he says. On the other
hand, he’s grateful that Kryptos continues to fascinate: “Frankly, the
greatest satisfaction I get is that I have created an artwork which keeps
on giving.”
After my visit to the CIA, I post my observations on the Kryptos
message board. They are deeply arcane, but that’s the point. I write
about the whirlpool abutting the sculpture, my compass going crazy
when placed on a nearby magnetic stone, and the position of the bolts
that run through the middle of Kryptos.
I get a bunch of emails back. Overall, the community is thankful, but
they have more questions. Did the whirlpool swirl clockwise, or were
the waves random? Do you think there could be a speaker or
microphone hidden inside the drain, the metal box or the hole in the
granite? I don’t have the answers. I did my best, but I obviously didn’t
observe closely enough.
I decide to contact Mr. Sanborn one ﬁnal time. It should be noted that
he’s not just a talented artist, he’s also an astute businessman. A few
years ago, he got annoyed that he was wasting so much time
responding to emailed guesses, so he instituted a new rule. You can
send him a guess, and he will send you a short response telling you if
you’re right or wrong. For that, you pay him $50.
I’m jealous. Fifty bucks for a sentence or two. That’s an enviable rate for
a writer. Others in the Kryptos community aren’t fans of the $50
charge. On the message board, some K4 solvers call this rule “tacky”
and accuse Mr. Sanborn of a scam.
I send in $50 via PayPal and submit my guess, which is just that—a
guess. My method was more impressionistic than scientiﬁc: I tried to
enter the mind of Jim Sanborn and come up with something in his
MORE IN IDEAS
Philip Guston Made Images That Spark Arguments April 22, 2022
The Unoﬃcial Story of the Handover of Hong Kong April 22, 2022
Don’t Expect Sanctions to Win the Ukraine War April 21, 2022
Does Religion Make People More Ethical? April 20, 2022

[[page 5]]
voice. My guess is: “Took you long enough. Two steps Northeast of the
coordinates. Face 7 p.m. on Berlin clock. Walk 12 steps. Dig. Enjoy!” I see
it as a lottery ticket, a 1 in 4 billion chance these are the right letters.
A few days later, I got my answer. Jim thanked me for the money, but
“unfortunately it’s not the decrypt.” Not the wisest $50 I’ve spent in my
life, but it felt oddly satisfying to take my shot.
—This essay is adapted from Mr. Jacobs’s new book, “The Puzzler: One
Man’s Quest to Solve the Most Baﬄing Puzzles Ever, from Crosswords to
Jigsaws to the Meaning of Life,” which will be published by Crown on
April 26.
Appeared in the April 23, 2022, print edition.
Copyright © 2022 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. To order presentation-ready copies for distribution to your colleagues, clients or customers visit
https://www.djreprints.com.
The Wall Street Journal - Breaking News, Business, Financial & Economic News
Dow Jones & Company, Inc.
★★★★★(1,345)
×
