[[page 1]]
Dear fellow code breakers. October 31st 2025 seems a wonderful day to release an 
enigma on the world, and we are in a race against time. I can’t do it alone. 
Skip to Page 4 if you do not need a history lesson – but you will need history to solve K4. 
While I cannot reveal any partial plaintext solutions for fear of reprisal from the creator of 
Kryptos itself (history proves itself) I will release to you the process by which to begin 
decrypting K4, which I discovered as originally intended. Not through use of a computer, 
nor through artificial intelligence, but by picking up a book and reading it in a library (…then 
on 
a 
computer…) 
As 
Sanborn 
intended, 
all 
the 
way 
back 
in 
1990. 
 
Skip to the last page, should you be filled with doubt at the outset. 
KRYTPOS CIPHER TEXT ON FOUR PANELS (Wikipedia). 
 
Morse code inscription on site of CIA installation (Wikipedia) 
Translations of Morse code (K0) on copper slabs when read facing south, on the grounds of the CIA headquarters. 
E E VIRTUALLY E | E E E E E E INVISIBLE              DIGETAL E E E | INTERPRETATIT     E E SHADOW E E | FORCES E E E E E  
LUCID E E E | MEMORY E                                             T IS YOUR | POSITION E                                  SOS  
Cipher Method: Vigenère 
Keyword: cipher alphabet 
KRYPTOSABCDEFGHIJLMNQUVWXZ 
and cipher key PALIMPSEST 
Plaintext Solution: 
BETWEEN SUBTLE SHADING 
AND THE ABSENCE OF LIGHT 
LIES THE NUANCE OF IQLUSION 
Code breaker’s note: 
PALIMPSEST: a manuscript or piece 
of writing material on which the 
original writing has been effaced to 
make room for later writing but of 
which traces remain. Something 
reused, altered but still bearing 
visible traces of its earlier form. 
Kryptos K4: The Wonderful Painted Chest & Carter’s Magnificent Robe 

[[page 2]]
Plaintext Solutions from Section 1, 2 and 3 of the FOUR KRYPTOS PANELS (Wikipedia). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cipher Method: Vigenère 
Cipher alphabet 
KRYPTOSABCDEFGHIJLMNQUVWXZ 
and cipher key ABSCISSA 
Plaintext Solution: 
BETWEEN SUBTLE SHADING 
AND THE ABSENCE OF LIGHT 
LIES THE NUANCE OF IQLUSION 
Code breaker’s note: 
ABSCISSA: the horizontal x-axis of a 
two-dimensional graph, which, 
along with the y-coordinate, 
precisely defines the location of a 
point on a plan. 
Cipher Method: Transposition 
Cipher key: 0362514 (KRYPTOS) 
Plaintext Solution: 
SLOWLY DESPARATLY SLOWLY THE REMAINS OF PASSAGE DEBRIS THAT 
ENCUMBERED THE LOWER PART OF THE DOORWAY WAS REMOVED WITH 
TREMBLING HANDS I MADE A TINY BREACH IN THE UPPER LEFT HAND CORNER AND 
THEN WIDENING THE HOLE A LITTLE I INSERTED THE CANDLE AND PEERED IN THE 
HOT AIR ESCAPING FROM THE CHAMBER CAUSED THE FLAME TO FLICKER BUT 
PRESENTLY DETAILS OF THE ROOM WITHIN EMERGED FROM THE MIST X CAN YOU 
SEE ANYTHING Q ? 

[[page 3]]
LIBRARY SCIENCE & OSINT DISCOVERY – JUNE 27 2025 
 
 
Code breaker’s introduction: 
For the Kryptos community, this is where we move 
away from an area of highly studied content, to an 
area that, in 35 years, no one has studied or 
documented. 
This is Jim Sanborn, the artist, coming out, showing 
his love for the discovery of the Tomb and the 
treasures inside and marrying it with a cipher. 
The photographs at left refer to The Tomb of Tut-
Ankh-Amen, as documented and discovered by the 
Late Earl of Carnarvon and Howard Carter. 
This document has rarely been OCR’d correctly, and 
to date no code breaker has given this manuscript a 
top to bottom read and found the correct sections, 
approximately 100 pages later (more if you include 
the annexes of photographic record). Since 2010, this 
document has shown up on Archive.org, but has 
been very poorly OCR’d. Here are searchable 
references on Archive.org I and Archive.org II 
You will find this studied on the next page, but 
before you continue I must explain that an approach 
has been applied to discern a significant portion of 
the K4 plaintext using a novel method described 
herein, which is not difficult to replicate –especially 
not for my friends in Kryptos circles. 
Instead of seeking fame or interfering with the 
auction of the K4 plaintext coming next month, I am 
instead sharing this critical decipherment process so 
that the Kryptos community, and the thousands of 
codebreakers that have looked at Kryptos since 1990, 
can appreciate the artistry Sanborn was aiming for. 
Sanborn installed Kryptos at a time when he 
expected sleuths to visit a library, pick up a book, 
and read it for clues. That’s why all previous 
attempts at this deciphering this passage have 
failed.  
Prepare yourself, then get to work! For you are about 
to see wonderful things! 
It’s been waiting for us all along, but we were 
looking so hard at this passage we forgot to explore 
exactly what happens inside the tomb. 

[[page 4]]
 
 
 
Code breaker’s note: Let’s go. We begin exactly seventy pages later 
in this specific version of Howard Carter’s account of the opening of 
the Tomb of Tutankhamen (first volume of three, first edition, 
reprinted 2010, OCR’d 2017, OCR re-map 2019). 
At this point, Carter has explored the first portions of the tomb and 
certain artifacts are being brought back for study. 
I will use two styles of inserting helpful guidance to you. 
- 
Direct [GREEN] Code breaker’s notes  
- 
Indirect [ORANGE] in-line assistance 
Page 163:…it became increasingly difficult to keep track of the work, 
and it was only by close attention to detail [hint from Sanborn], and 
strict adherence to a very definite order of procedure [follow these 
steps that will be revealed to a “T”], that we managed to keep clear of 
complications.….Each of the primary objects had been given its own 
registration number in the tomb, but … an elaborate system of sub-
numbering became necessary. [You must address the subsystem]. 
Page 164: …A box, for instance, might contain fifty objects, any one of 
which must be clearly identifiable at all times, and these we 
distinguished by letters of the alphabet, or, where necessary, by a 
combination of letters [a literal nod from Sanborn that we have now 
arrived where he intended]…Not infrequently it happened that the 
component parts of a single object, scattered in the tomb, were 
entered under two or more numbers, and in this case cross-references 
in the notes were necessary. [Throughout Carter’s account, various 
photographic evidence will be important to come back to]. 
So much for our system of work. [Sanborn’s ciphersystem for K4] Let 
us turn now to the individual treatment of a selected number of the 
antiquities [the decipherment process that is about to be described].  
The first that required treatment in the laboratory was the wonderful 
painted casket (No. 21 in our register)…[a final nod that we’re on the 
right track.] 
Code breaker’s note: I must spoil some surprise now loyal readers 
and fellow cryptographers, Kryptos is in fact the “wonderful painted 
casket” and antiquity number 21 in Carter’s register is in fact K4, 
which Carter calls the magnificent robe. 
Sanborn was pointing to it all along. K3 ends with the question: Can 
you see anything? The answer Carter gave in his account of the tomb 
was: “Yes, wonderful things.” Although the word wonderful appears 
elsewhere in the approximate 230-page manuscript, there is only one 
place you need to concentrate on for solving K4 at this time – and 
it’s not when Carter answers that question a third of the way through 
his account, but when he describes the wonderful painted casket 
and what he found inside – a literal palimpsest of treasures. 
 

[[page 5]]
 
 
 
Code breaker’s note: In order to appreciate what you’re about to see and learn, take the time to study this box and the 
below images closely. There are lovely, high definition current photographs online of the original items, as well as the 
critical reconstruction of the mysterious robe.  
Carter photographed four stages of opening the “wonderful painted casket” [aka Kryptos itself, as a whole]. Inside, 
there was a great deal of individual treasures – only one of which is important to you right now –the magnificent robe. 
The images themselves were photographed and labelled A, B, C, D, literally showing the stages of unpacking the 
“wonderful painted casket” aka Kryptos. It is a direct echo of K1, K2, K3, and K4, which I will describe next. 
Section K1
Section K2
Section K3
Section K4, and what remains below: K5/K0

[[page 6]]
 
 
 
Page 165: Drastic measures were necessary…Courage was 
needed to take the step, but we were thoroughly justified by 
the result…We used this process later on a number of other 
objects of wood and gesso 
So much for the outside of the casket. [Kryptos as a whole]. 
Now let us remove the lid and see what the inside has in 
store for us. This is an exciting moment, for there are 
beautiful things everywhere…there is nothing to forewarn 
one as to what the contents of any individual box [or cipher 
within] may be. 
In this particular case, by reference to the four views on 
Plates XXXIV and XXXV, the reader can himself follow the 
successive stages in the clearing [the process of going 
through K1 through K4, and it will give him some idea of the 
difficulty of handling the material [K5] if I explain that it took 
me three weeks of hard work to get to the bottom of the box 
[K5 again; Kryptos as a whole]. 
Code breaker’s notes: 
- 
“beautiful things everywhere” is harkening back to 
Carter’s “Wonderful things statement,” this is a 
Sanborn clue. 
- 
The “four views” refers to the photographed stages 
of uncovering on the previous page, which when 
combined will grant you access to successive stages 
of the Kryptos solution, and what sits on the bottom 
of the buried contents. 
Take a deep breath now! We’re uncovering the secret just 
like Carter did, just like Sanborn intended with Kryptos. 

[[page 7]]
 
 
 
Page 167: The first photograph was taken immediately after the lid had 
been removed, and before anything was touched.  
Layers of the palimpsest: 
1. On the right there is a pair of rush and papyrus sandals, in perfect 
condition [K1: palimpsest; the sandals were not in perfect 
condition, but were reconstructed back in the lab]. 
2. below them, just showing, gilt head-rest [K2: just showing, and 
discernable as vignere] 
3. lower again, a confused mass of cloth, leather, and gold, of which 
we can make nothing as yet. [K3: columnar transposition merely 
reveals the plaintext of K3, but this plaintext alone is not enough on 
its own to decipher K4] 
4. On the left, crumpled into a bundle, there is a magnificent royal 
robe, and in the upper corner there are roughly shaped beads of 
dark resin. [K4] 
Code breaker’s notes: K4 has finally been found in the wonderful painted 
chest. The magnificent royal robe. 
Page 167: The robe it was that presented us with our first problem, a 
problem that was constantly to recur—how best to handle cloth that 
crumbled at the touch [palimpsest], and yet was covered with elaborate 
and heavy decoration [letters]. In this particular case the whole surface of 
the robe [K4] is covered with a network of faience beads [cipher component 
a], with a gold sequin [cipher component b] filling in every alternate square 
in the net. [process key i]. These—beads and sequins—had originally been 
sewn to the cloth [K4], but are now loose [and jumbled up; the ciphertext]. 
A great many of them are upside down [process key ii]…At the borders of 
the robe—they are underneath, and do not show in the photograph 
[process key iii]—there are bands of tiny glass beads of various colours, 
arranged in patterns [process key iv]. The upper layer of cloth was very 
deceptive in appearance. It looked reasonably solid, but if one tried to lift it, 
it fell to pieces in one’s hand. 
Code breaker’s notes: Sanborn is literally using Carter’s account to describe 
Kryptos as a whole and the K4 process here. 
Page 167: Below, where it had been in contact with other things, the 
condition was much worse [part of K4 continues beyond the end of the 
ciphertext; the bottom of the sculpture touching the ground has something 
buried below it and hidden]. This question of cloth and its treatment was 
enormously complicated for us in the present tomb [we must now move 
away from K3 into K4]. Had it been spread out flat, or neatly folded, it 
would have been a comparatively simple matter to deal with it. 
Code breaker’s notes: I hope I have your attention now. Sanborn was 
talking directly to us through Carter’s words for 35 years – we missed it. 

[[page 8]]
 
 
 
Page 168: we should…have had an easier task if it had been 
allowed to remain strewn about the floor of the chamber [hint: it 
must be laid flat, there is also later mention of a gilded necklace 
laid flat and photographed]…Nothing could have been worse for 
our purposes than the treatment it had undergone in the tidying-
up process… the various garments had been crushed, bundled 
and interfolded, and packed tightly into boxes with a mixture of 
other and, in some cases, most incongruous objects. 
Code breaker’s note: This entire description is reference to the 
keyword palimpsest from K1, but also an upcoming clue with a 
gilded necklace. 
Page 168: In the case of this present robe it would have been 
perfectly simple to solidify the whole of the upper layer and 
remove it in one piece, but this was a process to which there 
were serious objections.  
Code breaker’s note: the first half of this description refers to K1 
and K2 being encrypted with the vignère keyword. The ‘serious 
objections’ are the varying cipher methods at play, and now we 
are moving into K5 territory for later, being unable to completely 
remove K1 and K2 from the equation after solving K3 and K4. 
Page 168: It involved, firstly, a certain amount of danger to 
whatever might lie beneath, for in the unpacking of these boxes 
we had to be continually on our guard lest, in our enthusiasm 
over the treatment or removal of an object, we might inflict 
damage on a still more valuable one which lay under it [the 
bottommost, fourth documented object is the magnificent robe, 
below it rests K5/K0]. 
Page 168: Then, again, if we made the upper part of the robe 
solid, we should seriously have reduced the chances of extracting 
evidence as to size and shape, to say nothing of the details of 
ornamentation. 
Code breaker’s note: The ah-ha moment is below. 
Page 168: In dealing with all these robes there were two 
alternatives before us. Something had to be sacrificed, and we 
had to make up our minds whether it should be the cloth or the 
decoration  [process key v & vi]. It would have been quite 
possible, by the use of preservatives, to secure large pieces of the 
cloth, but, in the process, we should inevitably have disarranged 
and damaged the bead ornamentation that lay below [process 
key v]. On the other hand, by sacrificing the cloth, picking it 
carefully away piece by piece [process key v]. 

[[page 9]]
 
 
 
Page 169: we could recover, as a rule, the whole scheme of 
decoration  [the encryption method]  This was the plan we usually 
adopted. Later, in the museum, it will be possible to make a new 
garment of the exact size [the code breaker must organize and 
replicate the entire ciphertext], to which the original ornamentation 
[encoding]—bead-work beads [cipher component a], gold sequins 
beads [cipher component b], or whatever it may be [pearls; cipher 
component a]—can be applied.  
Code breaker’s note: we are now moving into the rules for K4 
decipherment and describing the remaking of the magnificent robe 
via pen and paper – it’s exact size, original ornamentation, and 
placement of its beads, gold sequins. 
Page 169: Restorations of this kind will be far more useful, and have 
a much greater archaeological value, than a few irregularly shaped 
pieces of preserved cloth and a collection of loose beads and sequins 
[all four sections, once recreated, will be used to decipher the 
installation, K1 through K0 as keys]. 
Code breaker’s note: Here it comes. I will insert words in square 
brackets to help you along. 
Page 169: The size of the robe [K4 cipher] from this [wonderful 
Kryptos] casket can be worked out with reasonable accuracy from 
the ornamentation [cipher components]. At the lower hem [of 
Kryptos, where K4 starts] there was a band [note the double 
meaning of the word ‘was’, it’s past tense, the robe has fallen into 
decay – it was there, but it also marks cipher key a locations; note 
the beginning of K4] composed of tiny beads [cipher key a; 
alphabetical letters] arranged in a pattern, a pattern of which we 
were able to secure the exact details [note the word secure, it 
means encrypt, it means to hide the exact plaintext, but also 
obtain]. From this band [K4] there hung, at equal intervals, a series 
of bead strings [cipher component a] with a large pendant at the 
end of each string [cipher component c, the recurring letters]. 
Code breaker’s note: large pendants are BB, SS, SS, ZZ,TT and RR; a 
second letter added to the end–I used RR–for a clean divisible of 98. 
Page 169: We can thus calculate the circumference of the hem 
[Kryptos, K4 wrapped in a cylinder shape, process key vii] by 
multiplying the space between the strings by the number of 
pendants [cipher component iii]. That gives us the width of the 
robe [Kryptos, K4]. Now we can calculate the total area [process 
key viii] of decoration from the number of gold sequins employed 
[cipher component ii], and, if we divide this total area by our known 
circumference at the bottom, we shall arrive at a fairly accurate 
approximation of the height [K4, then K5]. This naturally 
presupposes that our robe [Kryptos] is the same width throughout, a 
method of cutting borne out by a number of undecorated garments 
of which we were able to secure the exact measurements [cipher 
method]. 
Code breaker’s note:
The words “a method of cutting borne” refers that 
other Egyptian robes were cut in the fashion of 
cylinders, not cut to the shape of the body/wearer 
itself. A tube, in all senses of the word, top to 
bottom, with sleeves for arms, exactly like Kryptos. 
There is double meaning here as well for the 
decipherment. This entire page is what you need to 
begin solving K4 and the rest. It is the exact process 
that CIA employee Edward Scheidt took and 
masterfully crafted into the first half of K4’s cipher. 

[[page 10]]
 
 
 
Code breaker’s note: So you can sleep at night (or not) here are 
some final passages for your sanity, that you are walking down 
the correct path. You’re now following the footsteps of those 
who came before, and you will discover something incredible. 
Page 170: First of all we removed the rush sandals, which were in 
beautifully firm condition, and presented no difficulties [Sanborn 
indicate K1 would be the fastest and easiest to solve, but in fact the 
sandals were falling apart and palimpsest refers]. Next came the 
gilt head-rest [K2, following closely, there is also a photograph 
later], and then, very carefully, we removed the robe. [still some 
double meaning with K3; harder, but possible; a different method 
of encrypting from vignere].One large portion of its upper surface 
[K1, K2, K3] we managed to take out whole by the aid of a celluloid 
solution, and short lengths of the band decorations of small beads 
[K4; cipher component a]  we preserved in wax for future reference. 
The third photograph [where we first observed the magnificent 
robe as a confused mass of cloth, gold, beads and pearls] shows 
what we may call the second layer of the casket’s contents 
[Kryptos’ contents; the second layer; K3 and K4]. 
Code breaker’s note: full stop. We’re now examining the ‘second 
layer,’ which Sanborn had to clarify did not mean IDBYROWS. In 
2005, a fellow Canadian codebreaker, Nicole Friedrich, determined 
the correct plaintext capping off K2 was "XLAYERTWO", as 
confirmed by Sanborn a year later. Sanborn omitted an S in the 
ciphertext (an X in the plaintext), and he confirmed that the last 
passage of the plaintext was "WESTXLAYERTWO", and not 
"WESTIDBYROWS". Focus on this, when adding the extra 98th 
character for diving K4 as you know understand it. Using R helps. 
Page 170: Here, to begin with, were three pairs of sandals, or 
rather, to be accurate, two pairs of sandals and a pair of loose 
slippers. These were of leather, elaborately decorated with gold, 
and of wonderful workmanship (two of them are shown on Plate 
XXXVI). Unfortunately, their condition left much to be desired. They 
had suffered from their packing in the first place, but, worse than 
that, some of the leather had melted and run, gluing the sandals 
together and fastening them to other objects, making their 
extraction from the box a matter of extreme difficulty. So much of 
the leather had perished that the question of restoration became a 
serious problem. We secured the gold ornamentation that still 
remained in place with a solution of Canada balsam, and 
strengthened them generally as far as we could, but eventually it 
will probably be better to make new sandals and apply the old 
decoration to them. [This is a literal description of creating new on 
top of old: a palimpsest. Don’t forget this later]. 
Page 170: Beneath the sandals there was a mass of 
decayed cloth, much of it of the consistency of soot 
[virtually invisible, we may be approaching K5/K0 and 
what rests below the decayed robe], thickly spangled 
throughout with rosettes and sequins of gold and 
silver. This, sad to relate, represents a number of 
royal robes [Another nod from Sanborn; ciphers and 
art lost to time – unlike Kryptos, which can be solved]. 
Page 170-171: The difficulty of trying to extract any intelligible record from it can be imagined, but a certain amount of 
assistance was given by the differences in the sizes and shapes of the sequins [cipher component b]. 
 
 
 
 
 
palimpsest

[[page 11]]
  
 
 
Page 171: There were at least seven distinct garments. One…in cloth (see 
last photograph of the series, Plate XXXV, d); while two of the others were 
… shown in Plate LXXVIII. Bundled in with the actual garments there were 
a number of other objects—two faience collarettes of beads and pendants, 
two caps or bags of tiny bead-work which had almost entirely fallen to 
pieces, a wooden tag inscribed in hieratic “ Papyrus (?) [another nod to 
palimpsest, with the ? as well] sandals of His Majesty,” a glove of plain 
linen, an archer’s gauntlet, tapestry woven in coloured thread, a double 
necklace of large flat faience beads (see Plate XXXV, d), and a number of 
linen belts or scarves.  
Below the garments there was a layer of rolls and pads of cloth...and 
below…resting on the bottom of the box…there were two boards, 
perforated at one end for hanging, whose purpose is still doubtful 
[Kryptos Panel I and Panel II; left and right; likely a nod to K5 and K0].  
Code breaker’s note: K0, may in fact, be the tool you require at the end. A 
lodestone and morse code to break K5. The two boards whose purpose is 
still doubtful is the Kryptos statue itself, both panels. 
Code breaker’s note: this is where my job ends, and yours begins. You 
have approximately one month to use all of this information to arrive at 
the same conclusions I have. Solve K4, then go further than and attack 
Kryptos with everything you’ve learned. 
Good luck! 
Final clue: 
Page 172: Another interesting piece of evidence in this connexion 
[interesting archaic spelling in early-1900s, much like Kryptos misspellings 
in late 80s] is supplied by the fact that on the lid of one of the other boxes 
there is a docket which reads, “ The King’s side-lock (?) as a boy.” The 
question raises an interesting historical point, and we shall be eager to 
see, when the time comes, the evidence of age that the mummy will 
supply. One other point with regard to the robes found in this and other 
boxes. Many of them are decorated with patterns in coloured linen 
threads. Some of these are examples of tapestry weaving, similar to the 
fragments found in the tomb of Thothmes IV,1 but there were also 
undoubted cases of applied needlework. The material from this tomb will 
be of extreme importance to the history of textile art, and it needs very 
careful study.  
We shall not have space here to describe the unpacking of the other boxes 
[because, they’re irrelevant to Kryptos], but all were in the same jumbled 
state, and all had the same queer mixture of incongruous objects. Many of 
them contained from fifty to sixty individual pieces, each requiring its own 
registration card, and there was never any lack of excitement in the 
unpacking, for you never knew when you might not happen upon a 
magnificent gold scarab, a statuette, or a beautiful piece of jewellery.  
It was slow work, naturally, for hours at a time had to be spent working 
out with brush and bellows [pen and paper] the exact order and 
arrangement of collar, necklace, or gold decoration, covered, as they 
ordinarily were, with the dust of decayed cloth [the cipher; plaintext]. 

[[page 12]]
Code Breaker’s Clues – Annex I 
 
 
 
 

[[page 13]]
Code Breaker’s Clues – Annex II 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

[[page 14]]
Should you still be filled with doubt, start here, at the end, then go to the beginning. 
Kryptos is the painted casket. Inside, through layers of decayed treasure, there is a 
magnificent robe (K4) and that which rests below it (K5, K0). 
 
