---------

Rob,

For what it's worth, the interesting path that I have described can be found
without
seeking out any hidden clues, i.e. only using the concepts of:

1) "Palimpsest"
- Some "what ifs" are required to utilize this clue.
2) K1 Text (as I have already described)
3) K2 & K3 Text
4) "Abscissa"
5) One other "what if" operation that I haven't attributed any clues to yet.

But not necessarily in that order.

---------

As I indicated in the original post of this thread, to solve K4
you need to concentrate your efforts on finding the "original matrix", as
Scheidt has plainly said. This process involves
the locations of the misspelled characters, clues in the plain
text, and clues in the keywords "Palimpsest" and "Abscissa". While it is true
that K4 may require some modification, if you don't have this "original matrix"
in front of you then there is no way to
know when/whether your changes are correct.

---------

Hint 1: you are right about the ramifications of that "pesky" character
omission near the
end of K2. You need to insert the x into the plain text of K2 to get where you
need to go.

Hint 2: the keyword "Palimpsest" has much greater implication than this
reference to K3.

---------

You can forget about the cypher text from K1/2/3. Only the plain
text is used from here on.

---------

I have found the "original matrix" referred to by Sanborn and
Scheidt. This is no idle boast.

The transformations required to get to the original matrix involve:

(1) The locations of the misspelled letters,
(2) The keywords "Palimpsest" and "Abscissa", and
(3) Clues from the K1-K3 plain text. (You literally must interpret
all of it.)

In addition, some of the morse code introduced by Sanborn at various
locations around the complex corroborate my findings. That is, they
are not needed as clues, but they resonate well after the fact. (This
is probably why it was difficult for Sanborn to give a proper answer
to the question of whether these elements were important. Answering
either "yes" or "no" could be misleading.) In particular, I
understand the meanings of:

(1) DIGETALEEEINTERPRETATU,
(2) TISYOURPOSITIONE, and
(3) The Compass Rose with Lodestone

I am not yet 100% sure what to make of LUCIDEEEMEMORYE, but it may be
a reference to Morse Encryption, with the word "LUCID" as the keyword.

After obtaining this original matrix, K4 is revealed as coordinate
pairs into the matrix (i.e. reminiscent of a book cypher) that have
had an element deleted and then undergone columnar transposition. The
task before me is to properly reverse the columnar transposition,
properly use the resulting pairs to index into the matrix, and then
(perhaps) perform one more step of deciphering (e.g. Morse encryption).

While it is true that I do not yet have the final solution, the
process that I have discovered leads to a series of at least 6
wonderful observations that cannot all be coincidences. (Sanborn and
Scheidt are true geniuses to have created this remarkable puzzle.) If
you are working on any type of deciphering method that does NOT
involve first forming this matrix, I can ASSURE you that your efforts
will be in vain. The very nature of K4, i.e. a set of coordinate
pairs into a specific large array of characters, gave Sanborn and
Scheidt incredible flexibility in choice. For instance, when they
needed to encode the character "T", they had numerous different
coordinate pairs to choose from. This allowed them to set up all
kinds of alluring frequencies and/or tantalizing oddities in K4 that
lead to nowhere. Many of you have been going down these paths and
ignoring the other clues that were before you (misspelled letters,
keywords, and mysterious text).

I am working on publishing my findings, but it is not ready yet. But
I can tell you that the following vector is important:

B H L X O F N V P Q R T E M Z S K J W

Regards and Happy Sleuthing,
Randy Thompson

---------

Chuck,

Did you ever read the "Lord of the Rings"? At one point,
the "Fellowship of the Ring" is standing before a magical
doorway to the Mines of Moria, and their leader, Gandalf
the Wizard, is scratching his head trying to figure out
what he is supposed to say in answer to the writing "Speak,
Friend, and Enter", which is inscribed upon the doorway.
(If you say the right thing, then the door will open.)
It turns out that the inscription is nothing but a very
literal riddle. In fact, it is so plainly literal that
it goes right over Gandalf's head (or rather under it).
The proper interpretation of that riddle is that you are
supposed to speak the word "Friend" (in Elvish, actually...
or some other middle-Earth tongue) and then
"enter".

The same thing is going on here, but K1 is the door and
you are Gandalf. You are overthinking the riddle.
The "nuance of iqlusion" is simply the nuance (or, by
definition, the subtle difference) of the word "iqlusion".
It is a direct reference to the letter "Q" that does not
belong in the word. A reach, at first, I know, but hear me out...

Do you see another Q anywhere in the decoded plain text that
stands out? Of course you do. It is hanging out by itself
right there at the end of K3. What's that for? A coincidence?
Just an extra "Q" to make decoding harder? Well, that last
one is probably true, but it is there for a higher calling.

Note that K3 is all about barely seeing things through the
mist and darkness. Sounds like "subtle shading" to me.
And K2 begins with the phrase "It was totally invisible."
Sounds like the "absence of light" to me.

It turns out that the plain text of K1 is a clue that you
need to swap the order of K2 and K3 as one of the initial
steps to creating the "original matrix". Note that if you
perform this swap, you will have the Q (which is the
"nuance" in the word ""iqlusion") nestled snugly right
between "subtle shading" and the "absence of light".
Just like K1 says to do.

Randy

---------

---------

