[[page 1]]
M7  The weird  DELTA  HOTEL  duo 
 
Several years ago, when I read Jim's comment that he was surprised that no one had running it 
through all possible shifts, I began to perform shifting on all things and in all places. It was thus 
that using the K0 Morse texts as a key, I ran them over all the ciphertext, with all possible 
shifts, and I found in K2 the 162% of its key ABSCISSAABSCI / ALLYINVISIBLE (message #3952 
and following). 
 
Also in connection with the Archimedes Palimpsest and the possible anagram of EUREKA in the 
final part of K4: UEKCAR, and the first letter of K1: E, I tried the EUREKA key on all Kryptos, with 
all its possible shifts. Imagine my surprise when, by testing with the AEUREK shift and the 
KRYPTOS alphabet, I got TAKEMHMSSEVXUD starting at the first character of K1. It's easier to 
see it like this: TAKE MHMSSEV X ud. A clear instruction in correct English. Since in Kryptos the 
X is a period, I tested the key TAKEMHMSSEV on all Kryptos, using alphabets with all the 
KRYPTOS shifts. Testing with the PTOSKRY alphabet I got: DELTBPAHOTEWZL, again starting 
from the first character of K1. It's easier to see it like this: DELTbpA HOTEwzL. Very weird isn't 
it? They are two 5-letter words from the select group of 26 words, unique in the world, that 
integrate the international phonetic code. Also with the same pattern: The first 4 correct 
letters, two interleaved letters, and the correct final letter. This cannot be just random. This is 
intentional. It's a new example that Kryptos gives us of duress code. With the same ciphertext 
EMUFPHZLRFAXYU and keys PALIMPSEST and KRYPTOS, we get the first message: BETWEEN 
SUBTLE S, which we already know. But with AEUREK, KRYPTOS and PTOSKRY keys, we get a 
second message: DELTbpA HOTEwzL. Of course I saw the possible relationship with the DYAHR 
cluster, since D and H are the 2 characters that remain aligned with the rest of the row. But 
when I did not find how to use them, they went on to integrate the list of hot words and were 
left on the shelf of the intentional things that might one day be useful. Only when DELTA and 
HOTEL began to appear, sometimes partially, in the Matrix System (M6 message) and in K4 
(M4 and M5 messages), did I become convinced that the weird duo has an important role to 
play in K4 and K5. 
 
When using the TFJ algorithm and following the clue “I and D BY ROWS”, I found NORTH in its 
correct place #26 (message M5), I also found a correct HOTEL in place #31. What's more, I 
found this before Jim released the plaintext “NORTH EAST”, so I interpreted the possible 
plaintext for K4 as “NORTH HOTEL”. So if there is a North Hotel, there must also be a South 
Delta somewhere. Another thing that caught my attention was the appearance of the 
anagrams of ZENITH and DEBRIS (message M6). DEBRIS appears in K3, but ZENITH and its 
opposite NADIR were new words, therefore added to the hot word list. The imaginary line 
passing between the Zenith and the Nadir of an observer on the earth's surface, also passes 
through the center of the earth and reaches another point on the earth's surface called... 
Antipodes! Yes, another Jim sculpture containing the Kryptos ciphertext and the Cyrillic 
Projector ciphertext. Languages English and Russian, CIA and KGB, USA and USSR. They may be 
in the Antipodes of philosophical or political thought, but the USA and the USSR are not 
geographic Antipodes, both are in the Northern Hemisphere. 
 

[[page 2]]
Another way of looking at BERLIN's World Time Clock and its list of cities, is as a primitive 
Antipodes map. If we look at the cities that are in a time zone and compare them with those 
that are in the +12 time zone, we could start looking for pairs of Antipodean cities. Since 70% 
of the earth's surface is water, the pairs of antipodean cities are very few. A more refined map 
of the Antipodes is as follows: 
 
 
 
Finally, several members of the group interpreted that the 3 raised letters of the DYAHR 
cluster could mean the word RAY written backwards. A ray between H in the North and D in 
the South. Again, the concept of Antipodes rises. If those members are correct we will find 2 
new cities like BERLIN which is in K4, or as SAN FRANCISCO candidate to be in K4 (M4 
message), which are also in the World Time Clock, one starting with H with its Zenith in the 
Northern hemisphere and another starting with D with its Zenith in the Southern hemisphere. 
 
The cities that are in the World Time Clock of the Northern Hemisphere and that begin with H 
are: HELSINKI, HANOI, HONG KONG, HONOLULU, HAVANNA and HALIFAX. The one in the 
Southern Hemisphere that begins with D is: DAR IS SALAM. But its antipode is in the North 
Pacific Ocean. Let's not get discouraged, perhaps of the cities we are looking for, one is in the 
World Time Clock, the one that begins with H, and not the one that begins with D. 
The antipodes of the first two, HELSINKI and HANOI, are in the South Pacific Ocean. The 
antipodes of the last two HAVANNA and HALIFAX, are in the South Indian Ocean. The antipode 
of HONG KONG is in the North of Argentina, close to the border with Bolivia, in the Andes 
Mountains. The map above shows that the Antipodean city of HONG KONG is HUMAHUACA. 
Humahuaca is a city of less than 11,000 inhabitants and does not begin with D. 
 
The Antipode of HONOLULU 21 degrees 18 minutes N, 157 degrees 51 minutes W is in the 
North of Botswana, at the coordinates 21 degrees 18 minutes S, 22 degrees 9 minutes E. The 
map above shows that the Antipodean city of HONOLULU is GHANZI. Ghanzi is a city of less 
than 15,000 inhabitants and does not begin with D. Instead, 220 km from the coordinates, we 
find the DELTA of OKAVANGO! This can't just be random, this is intentional. Instead of a city, a 
real DELTA. A unique and special place in Africa. It was declared a World Heritage Site by 

[[page 3]]
UNESCO for its special natural characteristics of its wildlife. It has also been named as one of 
the Seven Natural Wonders of Africa. In the DELTA we can find many animals, among them 
The Big Five: lion, leopard, buffalo, elephant and rhinoceros. It is unique because unlike other 
great rivers such as the Nile, Amazon, Mississippi... that end in Deltas that flow into water: 
oceans, seas, gulfs, lakes or estuaries, the OKAVANGO River flows into land, its Delta is 
extinguished in the Kalahari desert. 
 
                                      
 
 
The distance, by surface, between a site and its Antipodes is about 20,000 km, so the 
difference of 220 km has an error of 1.1%. The OKAVANGO DELTA is an acceptable Antipodes 
of HONOLULU. We don’t know yet if OKAVANGO or HONOLULU will appear in the K4 plaintext, 
but those do become part of the hot words list. If it's just an Easter egg, it's an extraordinary 
egg. Furthermore, in the new C/P matrix (message M6) the last 4 letters of HOTEL, DELTA and 
OKAVANGO appear, and the symmetry between OTEL and ANGO could be interpreted as an 
arrowhead or a triangle, that is, the fourth letter of the Greek alphabet : ∆ DELTA, hence the 
name the mouth of a river in a triangular shape. 
 
In the next message we will see how to use the coordinates of K2, which begin to open new 
doorways for us. We will begin to see, in the distance, the first reflexes of K5. There is still 
much more! 
 
Jose Luis 
 
