## word/document.xml
 
 All Kryptos Interviews and Articles 
 This document contains all the interviews and articles I’ve been able to find about Kryptos. I’ve chosen to include articles which contain quotes from those directly associated with Kryptos. Quotes or text directly attributed to Jim Sanborn have been highlighted in yellow for easy scanning. 
 
 
 Table of Contents 
 TOC \o "1-3" \h \z \u 1989-12-15 - Letter to the Agency PAGEREF _Toc189575702 \h 2 
 1991 - Associated Press in Washington PAGEREF _Toc189575703 \h 4 
 1991 - CNN PAGEREF _Toc189575704 \h 7 
 1991-03-18 Time Magazine PAGEREF _Toc189575705 \h 8 
 1991-04-01 - ABC PAGEREF _Toc189575706 \h 9 
 1991-04-01 - ABC PAGEREF _Toc189575707 \h 12 
 1991-04-01 - ABC PAGEREF _Toc189575708 \h 19 
 1991-04-02 - ABC PAGEREF _Toc189575709 \h 25 
 1998 - CIA PAGEREF _Toc189575710 \h 27 
 1998-07-15 - ABC News PAGEREF _Toc189575711 \h 58 
 1999-06-16 New York Times PAGEREF _Toc189575712 \h 66 
 Date: Thu, 17 Jun 1999 14:30:41 -0400 PAGEREF _Toc189575713 \h 69 
 1999-07-17 - Washington Post PAGEREF _Toc189575714 \h 70 
 1999-08-26 - NPR PAGEREF _Toc189575715 \h 75 
 1999-12 - Dr. Dobbs Journal PAGEREF _Toc189575716 \h 78 
 2000-03-16 - Baltimore Sun PAGEREF _Toc189575717 \h 80 
 2003-11-05 - Elonka PAGEREF _Toc189575718 \h 84 
 2003-11-11 - Atomic Time PAGEREF _Toc189575719 \h 90 
 2005-01-20 - Wired PAGEREF _Toc189575720 \h 92 
 2005-01-21 - Wired PAGEREF _Toc189575721 \h 100 
 2005-05-27 Wall Street Journal PAGEREF _Toc189575722 \h 103 
 2005-06-09 - NPR PAGEREF _Toc189575723 \h 106 
 2005-06-11 - The Guardian PAGEREF _Toc189575724 \h 108 
 2005-06-20 - CNN PAGEREF _Toc189575725 \h 111 
 2005-06-21 - CNN PAGEREF _Toc189575726 \h 113 
 2005-07-05 - CTV PAGEREF _Toc189575727 \h 116 
 2006-04-06 - Wired PAGEREF _Toc189575728 \h 117 
 2006-04-21 - NPR All things Considered - LAYERTWO PAGEREF _Toc189575729 \h 120 
 2006-04-22 - NYT PAGEREF _Toc189575730 \h 123 
 2007-07-01 - NOVA Interview PAGEREF _Toc189575731 \h 125 
 2007-07-24 - NOVA PBS - PAGEREF _Toc189575732 \h 171 
 2007-07-30 - PBS Interview PAGEREF _Toc189575733 \h 177 
 2009-04-20 - Wired PAGEREF _Toc189575734 \h 180 
 2009-05-18 - The Independent PAGEREF _Toc189575735 \h 186 
 2009-07-14 – Smithsonian PAGEREF _Toc189575736 \h 189 
 2009-10-16 - Dinner PAGEREF _Toc189575737 \h 301 
 2009-11-01 - Discovery Channel PAGEREF _Toc189575738 \h 303 
 2010-11-19 - Wired PAGEREF _Toc189575739 \h 307 
 2010-11-20 - NYT - BERLIN PAGEREF _Toc189575740 \h 308 
 2010-11-21 - Wired PAGEREF _Toc189575741 \h 311 
 2010-11-23 - CBC Radio PAGEREF _Toc189575742 \h 314 
 2011-10-08 - Dinner at Zola's PAGEREF _Toc189575743 \h 320 
 2013-06-05 - Wired PAGEREF _Toc189575744 \h 324 
 2013-07-06 - Big Tech Day 6 - CHART PAGEREF _Toc189575745 \h 326 
 2013-07-10 - Wired PAGEREF _Toc189575746 \h 331 
 2014-10-06 - Eurogamer PAGEREF _Toc189575747 \h 339 
 2014-11-20 - NYT - CLOCK PAGEREF _Toc189575748 \h 350 
 2014-11-20 - Wired PAGEREF _Toc189575749 \h 353 
 2019-03-01 - Elonka PAGEREF _Toc189575750 \h 358 
 2019-03-02 - Elonka PAGEREF _Toc189575751 \h 360 
 2019-03-03 - Elonka PAGEREF _Toc189575752 \h 361 
 2019-07-08 - Great Big Story PAGEREF _Toc189575753 \h 365 
 2020-01-29 - NYT - NORTHEAST PAGEREF _Toc189575754 \h 367 
 2020-01-30 - NYT PAGEREF _Toc189575755 \h 371 
 2020-10-1 - AJ Jacobs PAGEREF _Toc189575756 \h 374 
 2020-11-17 - AJ Jacobs PAGEREF _Toc189575757 \h 379 
 
 
 
 
 
 1989-12-15 - Letter to the Agency 
 Dear Agency Employees: 
 I am writing this letter to give you an idea of what I am up to at the Agency, and to explain those big tilted slabs of stone. 
 The stonework in the courtyard and at the entrance to the new building serves two functions: 
 First, it creates a natural framework for the project as a whole and is part of a landscaping scheme designed to recall the natural stone outcroppings that existed on this site before the Agency, and that will endure as do mountains. 
 Second, the tilted strata tell a story like pages of a document.  Over the next several months, a flat copper sheet through which letters and symbols are cut will be inserted between these stone "pages." This code, which includes certain ancient ciphers, begins as International Morse and increases in complexity as you move through the piece at the entrance and into the courtyard.  Its placement in a geologic context reinforces the text's "hiddenness" as if it were a fossil or an image frozen in time. 
 An installation in the courtyard further explores this theme.  On the paved surface, supported by a petrified tree, will stand a curved, vertical copper plate. Approximately 2000 letters of the alphabet are cut through this plate (a process which requires four months of work).  The left side of the plate is a table for deciphering and enciphering code, developed by Blaise de Vigenere in 1570. 
 The right side is a text that can be partly deciphered by using the table and partly by using a potentially challenging encoding system.  The text, written in collaboration with a prominent fiction writer, is revealed only after the code is deciphered. 
 My choice of materials, like code, conveys meaning.  At the entrance a lodestone (a rock naturally magnetized by lighting [sic]) refers to ancient navigational compasses.  The petrified tree recalls the trees that once stood on this site and that were the source of materials on which written language has been recorded.  The copper, perforated by text, represents this "paper."  I also use another symbol; water.  In a small pool on the plaza, partly surrounded by the copper plate, water will be turbulent and provocative, constantly agitated into standing waves.  In the other pool, located among trees in the courtyard and between two massive outcroppings, water will be calm, reflective, contemplative.  Other materials around the site -- large stones, ornamental grasses, and small trees -- are designed to make the natural features surrounding the Agency more visually interesting and thought provoking. 
 My work at Langley is approximately two thirds complete.  If you see me or my apprentices working, please don't hesitate to ask questions about the work. 
 Sincerely, (signed) Jim Sanborn 
 
 1991 - A ssociated P ress in Washington 
 From the A ssociated P ress in Washington, it reads: 
 The $250,000 sculpture decorating the courtyard at the CIA headquarters contains a secret, coded message so difficult to Unscramble that it’s spooking the spy agencies, smartest spooks. 
 Sculptor Jim Sanborn wrote the message, but steadfastly refuses to double its contents. He says the text is only known to himself and CIA Director, William Webster, and neither is talking. 
 Sanborn encrypted brain teaser contains about 2000 letters on the curving copper plates of his outdoor sculpture, ”Kryptos”. The work was erected outside, the mirrored windows of the CIA cafeteria, offering a tantalizing challenge to the lunchtime crowd inside. 
 “Everyone wants to know what it says “Sandborn says. “There out there all the time. There are groups of dark, suited people pointing at it and getting down on their knees, trying to figure out what it says. Some take photographs. One guy copied the whole thing down with pencil and paper.” 
 Months ago, as rumors of the mystery sculpture swept through the corridors of the CIA wooded enclave in suburban Langley, Virginia, police caught two men, climbing ladders outside Sanborn’s Washington studio trying to photograph the inscription through his windows. 
 Sanborn says “a friend of a friend” told him recently that frustrated CIA operative sent a copy of the coded message to there are trials at the national security agency to run through their ultra smart Cray super computer. 
 The sculptor, a big, bearded 45-year-old who wears aviator sunglasses, talks freely about his other works, which have been exhibited at the Smithsonian’s hirshhorn museum and the corcoran gallery of art in Washington. 
 However, when he discusses krytpos —which is Greek for hidden — Sanborn retreats behind the cautious, elliptical speech of somebody who’s trying to hide something. 
 He said the sculpture’s message deals on several levels with the CIA tradition of secrecy. He hints that it was a collaborative project, possibly written what the help of a prominent spy novelist, but he wouldn’t elaborate. 
 The inscription includes a Vigenere table, a system of ciphers designed by 16th century French cryptographer, blaise de Vigenere, and a Vigenere coded message that Sanborn says an expert can decipher in a few hours. 
 The rest of the message, contained in the lower quadrant, is a whole different ballgame of multiple codes, Sanborn said. It was written by a retired CIA cryptographer whom the sculptor refuses to identify. 
 They conducted business only at secret locations, never by telephone or in writing. 
 “He developed something that really stumped them out there”, Sanborn said. “ Parts can be deciphered in a matter of weeks or months, but other parts never be deciphered without the knowledge that Webster has. He has the key to the code, and he can easily figure the whole thing.” 
 Sanborn knew he’d have to share his secret with a CIA confidante. 
 “ Their business is gather information,” he said, “and if they don’t know what’s going on in their own backyard, how would anyone believe that they know what’s going on in the rest of the world? ” 
 So when the sculpture was dedicated in November 1990, Sanborn handed Webster two sealed envelopes. One contain the translation of the message. The other contained the keyword required to break the code. 
 For those of you die hard, who would like to beat out the intelligence communities experts, and solve crypto first, I’ve provided for your entertainment all the clues and information I could find. 
 There are four clues the puzzle designer left to be investigated: a sculpture containing the cipher text and code text, and magnetic loadstone, which makes a compass point south, a 106 character Morse code message, and two benches near the Lily pond. 
 the cipher and Code sculpture is very impressive. Decipher text is a half inch sheet of copper plate that measures 8‘ x 8‘ and is curved to form a “(“. The code text is also half inch sheet of copper plate that measures 8‘ x 8‘ and is curved to form a “)”. They both stand in to end from above they form a S next to this giant shape is a 12 foot high, petrified tree trunk, and a small fountain. 
 The compass and loadstone have an interesting orientation. The loadstone is magnetic, making a compass point to it. The compass is carved in a large flat stone next to the loadstone. The compass points south by southwest. 
 The new headquarters building (NHB) entrance has a 105 character Morse code message carved into the large flat half inch thick copper plates. 
 near the cipher, and Code sculpture are two wooden benches on the opposite sides of a small lily pond. One faces north, the other faces south. The benches are of normal construction with no special markings. The Lily Pond and stonework contain no special signs or symbols. 
 Taking each of these fore clues, intern may help bring together enough ideas from the puzzle guru conversation pit to lay a foundation for solving the five parts of this puzzle. The quest is to find the elusive plane keys. This endeavor may solve the puzzle and perhaps reveal the useful message it contains. 
 
 1991 - CNN 
 "As far as i know uh the artists and whoever helped them are the only people that know the actual meaning of the code." 
 The artist is J im S anborn , a W ashington DC sculptor , who collaborated with a retired CIA cryptographer to concoct the 
 conundrum 
 "There are lots of doors to go through to get to the meaning of the code and every time you enter or to enter one door away you might you know in the distance see another door and you go through that doorway and then you go through another doorway and it unfolds as it's deciphered." 
 the sculpture also includes a pond surrounded by slabs of granite a section of petrified tree trunk and a lodestone inscribed with a compass all are pieces of the puzzle together they cost taxpayers a quarter of a million dollars for an obj dar for 
 CIA’s only the agency says that's within customary limits for funding art for public building. 
 "It makes the uh courtyard and the entrance to the new building quite interesting uh it gives people something to talk about when they're out here eating lunch or 
 relaxing and it's uh it's both appropriate and very interesting." 
 Because of the cia's pension for privacy the courtyard was cleared before we could 
 give the sculpture even a cursory surveillance. We did spy some key words among the 2000 letters and located a grid originally devised by the 16th century French codemaster de vigneri but to the uninitiated the inscrutable sculpture yields few clues 
 despite our best efforts we were unable to crack the code however our exhaustive 
 investigation did reveal the sculpture's title concealed among the letters kryptos is a greek word meaning hidden as for the rest of the code it's all greek to me. 
 jamie mcintyre for cnn langley virginia https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mhHFXRQgCPo 
 
 1991-03-18 Time Magazine 
 https://web.archive.org/web/20091016064752/http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,972549,00.html 
 Secrecy at CIA headquarters extends all the way to the courtyard. Kryptos, a granite-and-copper sculpture by Washington artist Jim Sanborn, was quietly installed last November near a new building on the agency's grounds. Taxpayers financed the $250,000 work, but that does not guarantee public access. Sanborn's sculpture features a 2,000-character encoded message that is believed to have been penned by a well-known writer whose name has not been disclosed. Besides the artist and the author, only CIA director William Webster knows what the top-secret phrase says, according to an agency spokesman. The CIA does not allow the general public to visit its Langley, Va., compound, so Kryptos is on view only for employees or authorized visitors. Ironically, the Sanborn sculpture constitutes what the CIA calls its "Tribute to Information." 
 
 1991-04-01 - ABC 
 Transcript of B-roll interview between ABC's John Martin and Kryptos sculptor Jim Sanborn, 1991. Transcript created January 11 2004 by Elonka Dunin. 
 I guess, you know as you were describing how you went about working with Ed Scheidt. How you went about closing in and keeping prying eyes out and so forth. 
 And also how you went about trying to (sirens in background) to make this – I'll just keep filibustering as the siren goes by -- To make this, in a sense, only partly accessible. And I just wonder, so much of what artists do is to open themselves to the world (more sirens in background). Do you think.... (more sirens) this must be a three-alarm fire. 
 Mmm, it's a biggie. 
 (pause for sirens to go by) 
 Do you think working on the sculpture has closed you in a bit? Made you more secretive? 
 Well, it's certainly changed my work. I'll say that. It's had a tremendous effect on my work. I mean, since, I'll venture to say that I'm going to be with this secrecy thing for awhile. As I said, I've always worked with invisible forces in the past. Perhaps I'm becoming a bit more invisible myself. 
 How do you feel about that? 
 It doesn't bother me, it's really intriguing. Y'know, the whole project out there has been very -- the most interesting thing I've ever done, in my life, and so in that respect I think I regard it as a very valuable experience, in whole effect. 
 What do you think people will say about you as an artist when the secret is finally revealed? 
 Um (long pause) let's see. Well I would hope that um, the level of complexity is such that I will be regarded as, ah, smarter than most. That would be nice, wouldn't it? (laughs) But, uh, I don't know. I -- It's hard to say. I don't know that we'll have -- Let's just say that I've been very careful all the way along whether it's interviews or what it is, to place my feet firmly on either side of this imaginary line, of... whether I'm for or whether I'm against the work of the Agency, things like this. I think in that respect the piece reflects some of that, um, I would hate to call it mediocrity, that's the wrong term. But I think that the piece -- I think the -- the text is very – because it's secretive, it's the discovery of what it says will be an interesting thing in itself. I don't know that it will ever be totally figured out. I'm not convinced it will be. And that would be great. I would hope that it's never clear – totally clear. 
 You know, some people say that great art is, by its nature, subversive. 
 Well I suppose you could say in some ways that what I'm doing out there – what I've done out there could be subversive in some respect, and that it, it could corrupt somehow. Not necessarily in a negative way. But it might cause the people at the Agency to think about things a little differently. Perhaps think of things a little bit more -- less seriously perhaps. 
 Well the Agency is not reacting with any great humor about this. 
 No, I can't imagine any publicity is something which the Agency would love. And all the way along, there has never been a suppression, y'know... 
 They never told you not to talk to the press? 
 Well, they've told me not to say certain things, and, you know, not to be in certain places, but .... 
 Have they sent you the check yet? 
 Oh (laughs), well that was spent long before the piece was built, but ...... 
 So you have a responsibility to them you feel? At least in certain... 
 I have a responsibility to my piece. I don't want to, um... That piece is going to be there for a long time. And I don't want to necessarily poison the relationship, because that just 
 -- it lends negative associations to my piece that's sitting there all the time. I mean it's just, why would I want to, y'know, to make it a negative feeling when people went out in the courtyard and looked at the piece? I don't want that to happen. And that's one reason that I choose to be somewhere in the middle. 
 Anything about this you'd like us to understand that we haven't touched on? 
 I don't think so. You, you've done pretty well. We'll see what happens next! Y'know, the pulped pieces are going to be around for a long time, and I'm building a Code Room right now.... 
 What? 
 ...using Arabic text and Russian text, I'm building a room much like the rooms that the Agency operatives use in other countries to take the information that they've got and somehow transmit it to the Agency. These rooms are traditionally covered with some kind of copperscreen material to keep microwaves from penetrating the walls and keep the information from escaping also. And so I'm building rooms now using the pulp, and they're surrounded by this copperscreen in order to keep the secrets in or out. And so I'm going to be doing those for awhile. 
 Are they here in the st--, in this building? 
 Yeah, yeah, the first one. 
 Alright, well, thank you very much. Let me ask you to sit there for a--- 
 (cut) 
 (different angle, from behind interviewer's shoulder. Muffled chat) 
 What I'd love to do is to show, do you have-- actually if you have any more work that you could be doing that you might show, it'd be useful. Whether it's constructing the copper lining, or whatever else might be around, it's interesting, I've never... Right after 3-Mile Island I got sent to take tests 
 (cut) 
 (different angle, from behind Sanborn's shoulder, looking towards interviewer. Ambient sound) 
 (mid-sentence) . . . I'll do some kind of secret message. Did it come right to you, or did you have to think more about what you can do? 
 Well, I thought about it for a long time. I mean it took, I probably researched it for 6 months or 8 months before I laid pencil to paper. And, um, came up with sketches or ideas. Things. I mean, I thought about the work of the Agency, I thought about the work of the Agency in context of my own work, um, and things like that. 
 What other things did you consider? I mean.... 
 Well of course I considered the negative target that the Agency is. And the fact that y'know, the work that they do. The things that happened back in the 1970s, slowly began to develop what I wanted to do, and I based it on a lot of different factors. 
 You must have decided that if you put some kind of a negative message there, it would have less impact, or that it would be just... 
 Putting a negative message there was just too easy. It's just too easy. I mean, it's very easy to be part of --- 
 (cut) 
 
 1991-04-01 - ABC 
 Transcript of B-roll interview between ABC's John Martin and Kryptos sculptor Jim Sanborn, 1991. Transcript created January 10 2004 by Elonka Dunin and Andy Zimolzak. 
 Jim, how did you get the commission? 
 I was selected as part of a group. There were actually originally 5 sculptors commissioned by GSA and there was a panel that met, and it was a combination of CIA employees and also arts professionals. And then I was selected based on my previous work. 
 You knew this was a sculpture for the CIA, it wasn't just an anonymous GSA commission? 
 That's right, yeah. 
 What criteria did the CIA impose on this? 
 Well, you know to tell you the truth, I didn't see this criteria until after I'd finished it. But actually they did. There were some, there were quite a few actually that were given to the panelists, when they were choosing which artist was to do it. I'm trying to recall what it was exactly... 
 So what were they looking for? Did you have a sense of that? 
 They were looking for something that more or less depicted the spirit of the Agency in a large generalized way. 
 (noise in background, "Hold a sec") 
 Let's start over. How did you get the commission to start with? 
 It was a limited competition. Which means that my name was selected out of a group from a slide file at the General Services Administration Art and Architecture Program. And so, I was selected as one of five artists who were in a small group. 
 You were asked to submit proposals, designs? 
 Yes. We were a--- Well, no. We were really selected on the basis of our previous work. The things that we had done before. The type of work that I do generally. 
 And then how were you finally chosen? 
 I was chosen on that. And then once I was selected as the artist to do that, then I submitted a maquette to the group of panelists. Who were, some of them CIA, some of them arts professionals. Once that was, that panel met, in the Agency, I made a maquette, of the piece. 
 A maquette being a? 
 A large model, a very precise model of the whole project, what I was going to do for the project. And then I was selected based on that model really. 
 Is that the model that's in the other room? 
 Yes it is. 
 I see. 
 So that was really as much a landscape view of how it would look as an actual, um...Yeah, I've always done pieces that were -- the term is site-specific -- which means I build a piece for a specific site, and it will really only work on that site. And so in some ways I have assumed a role as landscape architect here, and that was part of the commissioned amount that part of that was set aside to build my piece into the landscape of the Agency. 
 Did the Agency impose criteria on what they wanted? 
 Well, they did present a list, which I only really saw after I had been commissioned. But which, they really wanted a piece which offered the spirit of the Agency up, and was something which would inspire the people there, and was of a contemporary nature, and it wasn't really totally historical, or another statue of William Casey, something like that, which they have a lot of. 
 What's the title of this piece, and what does it mean? 
 The title is Kryptos, and it's significant in a couple of ways. It's the Greek term for "hidden". And I've always worked with invisible forces, or making forces visible that are invisible, or visa-versa, and make visible things invisible. And so I chose that word as my keyword for the code also. I did it in large text that's cut through a copperplate out at the Agency. And that -- the keyword for some of that text is Kryptos. 
 Does that for you symbolize the CIA? 
 Well, to tell you the truth, when I was first commissioned, my ideas of what the Agency did and what the Agency was were quite different, then what I.... After I had done a lot of reading about the Agency, things that had been written, papers which had been written in the last 15 years primarily. I realized that it's different from what I originally thought it was. 
 What did you think it was? 
 Um, it was spies and spying. 
 And it's something different? 
 It's really information gathering. It gathers information, processes it, and then transfers that information, and people use the information. That's it's primary, that's what I understand now, is its primary mission. Obviously there are other layers, but those are the ones that I worked with, and those are the ones that I understand now. That information is what I – see all the information comes in, encoded generally in some form, and then it's processed and then sent out, encoded, in secret. 
 Well did you say to yourself, "Hmm, let me see if I can fool them with this?" 
 Sure. Yes. I mean, I ... The levels of complexity developed while I was building the piece. But I always thought that I wanted to fool them. Y'know that was always the plan from the very beginning. I don't know – fool them or make everybody out there think a little harder about maybe it isn't just things military which can be secret, or things like that. I mean it's a more general statement about secrecy that I make. 
 How did you decide what message to encode? 
 Well that changed during the course of the project as well. And that developed largely from the reading that I did about the Agency. And also while I was cutting out, physically cutting out the copperplates, things in my own mind changed. I wanted to put something on there which would -- Let's just say, that once the plate is deciphered, I'm not convinced the true meaning will be clear even then. I've made a statement which is straightforward, but that leads to something else. There's another deeper mystery. As you peel off a layer of an onion, the mist-- you get closer to the heart of what it is. And so y'know I just wanted to make it even after it was deciphered, you had to go deeper and decipher something else. It's in English, it's in plain English, it's in text, and you can read it, but that isn't necessarily the whole story. 
 Well, without revealing it, can you tell me its content? I mean, is it from literature, is it from drama, is it from history? 
 Well, the sources that I used came from a variety of places. I think if I try to pick out certain things by the process of elimination, and having done many interviews on the subject, it could be pieced together, and so I am reluctant to say a lot about its content. 
 How about a little? How about a little? Without, without... Just a context, I mean, so that somebody sitting at home would say, "Well, what are they talking about?" Is there.... Is this a famous quotation, for example? 
 I can't say whether it's a quotation. It is either a quotation or it's something I've written, or it's something somebody else has written. But let's just say, that it has a lot to do with secrecy. It has a lot to do with finding something, or opening something, or discovering something that's secret. 
 How did you come to share this with Director Webster? 
 Well very indirectly. I had originally not wanted to share it with anybody. I was told early on that I had to tell someone. And I said "okay well we'll just wait and see." And so, as the project developed, that changed, and it became clear I had to tell somebody. The Agency has to be more or less in control of what's in their front yard or back yard or whatever. And so I gave the code, I gave the text of the message originally, to the – at the Agency, to the -- There's a museum at the Agency, of memorabilia, on intelligence activity. There are things they're dealing with. Various aspects of covert operations. And so I gave it to the office of Historical Intelligence. I didn't want to tell them outright, and I didn't want to write this down. Ed suggested that I, Ed Scheidt the cryptographer, suggested that I try not to do things on paper, generally. And so, I presented it to the people in historical intelligence as just a verbal thing. But it became clear very quickly in just two weeks that they didn't, they couldn't handle the responsibility of the information. 
 All the world's secrets flowing into the CIA, they could not handle the responsibility of the secret of your sculpture? 
 That's right. Because what for example would happen if I had put something in that text, right in the center of the Agency, that was pornographic or something which was a complete embarrassment to the Agency, and that these people had read, and understood it, and had let it happen. And so, why would they believe me, anyway. What I'm telling them is the true meaning of it might not have been the true meaning of it. And so their jobs would have been on the line. And so what it came down to was the only person who could truly pass on it would be William Webster, or the President. And so the transfer took place that way. 
 Did he read it in your presence? 
 No, he was given a sealed envelope. And I -- there was a good bit of trepidation on whether I wanted to give that -- divulge that information. I said to myself, "Well, if I'm going to do this, I'd really like something in return." So, with the transfer I was allowed access to the pulped classified documents, which I am now using to create a new body of work that I'll be using for years.Now this is material, these are secret documents that have been made into pulp, and are... 
 Generally, are they thrown away? 
 Well, since the Iran/Iraq War, and before.. .No, not Iran/Iraq... yeah, since the Iran/Iraq war, the Agency has pulped their documents not shredded them, because during that period a few years ago, someone came up with a machine that could reassemble shredded information, and so now they grind it up into a paper pulp situation. And they mix the classified documents with other material from the Agency so it's a big jumble. It doesn't grind up everything though. When I pull my truck up to the back of the Agency and I fill it up with paper pulp which is basically a wet soggy material. It's called SoMat for Soggy Material, and so I pull up there, bring it back to my studio, pack it into mold forms, and then press letters of text into the surface, and let them dry for about a week. And then I come up with a prod—a wall panel that resembles something that's come from a temple of ancient origin. Something very old. 
 Are these all coded as well? 
 These are all coded as well. 
 There are messages too? 
 They are texts, yup, they are texts which have then been encoded, using some of the systems I used at the Agency, but other systems which are special and specific to these pieces. 
 Now, let me ask you about the coding. How did you go about coding the sculpture for the CIA? 
 Well, I thought long and hard about who I would use to encipher these things. And well, should I go... Okay, so I'll go to the Russian Embassy and I'll find something out over there. Some... I'll find some Russian cryptographer who will just love to do this, right? And I thought a little better about that. I thought about that for a long time. I didn't think it would make my job of building a sculpture at the Agency any easier. And so I didn't do that. And I started asking around. I asked people at the Agency who they might recommend, although I had reservations about doing that. I mean, who is this person I'm going to be getting, is all my information going to be transferred to the Agency through this person? 
 Can you trust them? 
 Can I trust them? And so... 
 Do you? 
 At this point, implicitly, yes, I do. After meeting with Ed, and working with him, there's no question. And he enjoyed the project a lot because he really would like to stump those folks out there. And I think he's done a very good job of it. 
 What have you heard from people out there about this? 
 Of course, it's indirect information, I don't necessarily have an inside person. I hear it by the grapevine or friends of friends. It's my understanding that the simpler parts of the encoded texts have been deciphered, as they had planned to be. Part of it was designed to be deciphered within a couple of weeks. Part of it was designed to be deciphered within a couple of months. And part of it within years, or never. 
 So you're on schedule? 
 I think I'm on schedule, mm hmm. 
 Is there a sense of frustration out there, from what you hear indirectly? 
 No. Quite, I, con-- on the contrary, I think the feedback that I've gotten recently, and actually just days after I installed the main part of the encoded piece, was people voluntarily came up to me and said, "Listen, don't ever tell anybody what this thing says." Because once -- My main fear of somebody finding out at the Agency what about what it says or anybody finding out what it says, is that, the mystery is gone. Once you've figured it out, it's gone. But my idea was that, I designed something that sure, somebody will figure it out eventually, and then personalities will change, y'know. 10 years will go by, 15 years will go by and they'll forget what it says again. And it'll always retain this enigmatic quality, and that's what I'm really trying to maintain out there, is something of an enigma. 
 CIA is being very secretive about it. They won't let us videotape out there, they won't let us come out and look at it. 
 Well I think that's more or less because it's the location. I mean, you know, the Agency is a very secretive place, and I think... 
 Can you see a lot of secrets from where it is? 
 When I was working out there? 
 Installing it? There out in the open. You can't see any secrets inside the buildings. 
 No, but you just really know they're there. You feel it. You feel it every day. You feel it. 
 Was it hard to work there for you? As an artist? 
 In the early days it was difficult, because there were a lot of negative comments made about what I was doing, while I was working in front of the building. I mean, I was working right at the main entrance to the building. Literally thousands of people would walk right past and through my construction sites. 
 What would they say? 
 A lot of the comments were things about the fact that the government was spending a quarter of a million dollars on what? Y'know, what is this, is this art? I mean, this is a pile of rocks. There was a lot of that, wasting governmental money and things like this. And it tends to wear you down after awhile. The negativity in the beginning prompted me to write a letter, an open letter to the employees at the Agency, and then simultaneously there were a couple articles that came out about the piece. And the combination of both things created a more positive environment. Because the people were more able to understand what I was doing. 
 What did you tell them in the letter? 
 I more or less explained exactly what I was doing. And the symbolism that was involved in the piece. Because there are other things aside from the code which are very esoteric. Or the material that I use might have some associative value which means that it's a powerful rock or something like that. There's a rock that's a symbol or something like this. And so I told them exactly the meaning of everything out there and ultimately what I hoped would happen. And I guess that helped to allay both their fears about what it might be and also help to explain about what it was so that it wasn't as intimidating. I think a lot of contemporary art can be very intimidating. Because it's not easily explained. Now, I don't want mine explained, because that just automatically – necessarily -- I think that automatically makes it less interesting. 
 Has anybody from the Agency or other Agencies tried to find out directly what this means? 
 Um, a lot of strange things happened while I was doing the piece. There were people caught on ladders trying to look in my window and photograph the piece through my windows, and they were run off by the police. There were some very strange individuals who tried to get into the building on a couple of occasions, early on in the project, while I was cutting up the plates and while I was doing the text. 
 You say strange individuals. Were they identified, do you know who they were? 
 Well, by their dress, they were. They were, let's say they fit the profile of a clandestine individual. I'd say that. I won't say they wore trenchcoats, but I mean, they looked like they were.... 
 Well it sounds from all the references they resembled Peter Sellers more than Bill Colby? 
 I think in some ways. But I'll tell you there are vestigial, there are a lot of vestigial Peter Sellers running around, associated with the Agency, or hoping to be part of that whole thing. And so, I don't know, these could have been just people off the street who had heard about this and really wanted to see what was going on. But it got to the point where I had to close all the windows and cover up the plates while I was working on them, because I worked on them for months here. And I didn't want to divulge. I had to hide all my documents. Didn't talk about it while I was on the phone. Ed Scheidt and I generally went to secure places to talk about the encoding systems. 
 
 1991-04-01 - ABC 
 From ABC "World News Tonight" B-roll, 1991. Multiple clips from two different tapes, 
 of ABC's John Martin interviewing Ed Scheidt. Transcript created by Elonka Dunin, 
 January 2004 
 (Closeups of pulped documents, with voices in the background. Maybe Scheidt and a 
 female voice.) 
 ED SCHEIDT Not very exciting. 
 (?) Got your blackboxes out there? 
 (?) Uh, yes. 
 (female voice) What are blackboxes? 
 ED SCHEIDT 
 The things that I developed like Jim has... Mine is devices that protect information....(unintelligible)...keys 
 (cut) 
 ED SCHEIDT Can you hear us? 
 (Martin) Yup, he can hear us. Ed, just want to start off. Tell me, what's your background with this? 
 ED SCHEIDT 
 Well, awhile back the Agency asked me to help Jim in, with the sculpture and develop some codes. 
 Before that, tell me your professional background, I'm sorry. 
 ED SCHEIDT Oh, okay. 
 What's your professional background in cryptography? 
 ED SCHEIDT 
 Well, I was a cryptographer and retired from the Agency. And that's basically all I'm allowed to say, but ... 
 (cut) 
 (angle over Scheidt's shoulder towards interviewer. Sound very muffled) 
 ED SCHEIDT 
 different enough, innovative enough to capture the imagination, I mentioned earlier about taking the standard. Not a lot of that stuff.... So that would be very.... lends 
 itself into things like... you've got that computer there that can be used in different things...addons....modular...last week we were talking... 
 (cut) 
 (Martin pointing to pulped pieces) Did you develop these? 
 ED SCHEIDT No, this is more recent 
 (cut) 
 (Martin) I'm going to start over and just ask you to kind of take us a little bit through, I know it's an abbreviated biography that, that you give us. But, tell me, what is your professional background? 
 ED SCHEIDT Well, I have advanced degrees in telecommunications in, from George Washington University, and I've done, worked in that field for awhile, and then bef—and then since then, well, as far as the CIA is concerned, I -- my last job with them was as a cryptographer, of course I retired as such. Since then, I've started my own business, in, along the same lines, that, developing products that can protect information on computers and into networks. 
 How did you get involved in this sculpture project? 
 ED SCHEIDT The Agency called me up and asked if I would be interested in that. Of course, being a former employee, they knew my background, and said, y'know, if you would like, do contact Jim, which I did. And then we worked about, oh, four months, or several months, on developing -- looking and examining the type of codes would be appropriate. 
 What did Jim ask you to do for it? 
 ED SCHEIDT He, well, basically went over what he was trying to accomplish, the theme. And at the same time, I provided during these months, tutorials on cryptography.... 
 Tutorials? 
 ED SCHEIDT Tutorials. Because, there are constraints, in the designs. And it's not only necessarily they have the secretive part of cryptography, but it has to match what you're trying – the objective of what you're trying to get.... 
 So it's really a philosophy as much as it is a technique? 
 ED SCHEIDT There is a certain type of philosophy in that too, yes, but more technique, in the sense of after you know what the person is looking for, for is the theme in the case with Jim, then you work up the codes or code, and then after that, y'know, it turns into a product as he did into the sculpture itself. 
 What I hear you saying... I'm a layman. I'm a person, I don't know anything about cryptography... But what I hear you saying is that you helped Jim design this encryption. Is that accurate? 
 ED SCHEIDT Well, I guess that is a middle of the stream type of thing. I didn't really get into the design. Jim had in his mind of the format, whether the actual structural concept....When I say design though, I mean, he designed the sculpture itself. 
 The sculpture part, right. It sounds to me as if you helped him design the way in which he would encrypt the information. 
 ED SCHEIDT Yes, that's right, that would be true there. 
 Is there a word or two that would describe what that design is? 
 ED SCHEIDT No, there's... we both have agreed not to talk about how that would be – how that came into being. As well as Jim is really the only person that knows what it says. I don't. And all I talked about, or we discussed, was the codes themselves, and the limitations as well as how it could it be adapted into his design. 
 Now there are certain keywords in this design, is that correct? Or in this code? 
 ED SCHEIDT Um, I'm not sure about that... 
 Well he said that he had shared both the message and what I think he called keywords with Director Webster. 
 ED SCHEIDT Right. 
 Is that right? 
 ED SCHEIDT Well, he used the keywords in the sense of, the analogy there is in codes itself, it does take a key to break the code. As well as of course you have to have a message. And, and as Jim had said, he did share both, or he gave both to Doctor We--- Mister Webster. 
 Do you think the Agency will be able to crack this? 
 ED SCHEIDT (laughs and shrugs) Don't know that one. That's part of my professionalism, I guess. 
 Is it possible to take ten years? 
 ED SCHEIDT (shakes head) That's a guess, I don't really know. 
 Why would it be so hard to crack this particular... 
 ED SCHEIDT Um, well, there's not many copies of it. And it is unique to Jim's design. So, that adds some element of difficulty, and of course it's secretive. Jim hasn't said what, what it entails. So it means that someone has to discover either the keys or the method or something like that. 
 Have you been contacted by any former associates to see if you could shed a light on what it is? 
 ED SCHEIDT (laughs) No. 
 What's been the reaction out there? 
 ED SCHEIDT I'm not sure really. I don't really get into that. I haven't followed up on it... 
 You haven't seen former colleagues who've said, "You devil you, you've really given Sanborn..." 
 ED SCHEIDT (laughs) No, not really. 
 So you don't know whether the Agency is perplexed or pleased or pissed off? 
 ED SCHEIDT (laughs) Not really. 
 They are being very secretive with us. They won't let us photograph it, they won't let us come out and look at it. Any idea why? Does that surprise you? 
 ED SCHEIDT No, I don't, y'know, I really don't know why. I can't speak for the Agency, I mean, that's their role, but, and that's their business, but... 
 Does it surprise you that they would want to prevent us from coming out there? 
 ED SCHEIDT I don't really have a, y'know, an answer for that. But, y'know, again, I'd have to defer that one to the Agency. 
 Um (pauses) anything about this that you'd like a layperson to know to understand about cryptography that you think is especially interesting in this, in this particular sculpture? 
 ED SCHEIDT In this particular sculpture? No, not really. I mean it is a straight sculpture and you have to look at it, and of course there is a secret code in there. And so there's... I know Jim put a lot of thought into how he would present this. So, y'know, aesthetically, it must look very pleasing, so... 
 Was it a lot of work for you? 
 ED SCHEIDT No, not a lot of work. I spent about a month after we decided on what code we wanted, and then after that gave Jim, "this is how you do it," and that was it. 
 Is this a common form of encryption? 
 ED SCHEIDT Common form? (shrugs) That's a leading question. (laughs) I'd rather not say anything about that. Sure. 
 I'm at a loss to ask you any other questions. 
 ED SCHEIDT (sympathetically) Sure. 
 You've parried everything I've asked... 
 ED SCHEIDT Well, it's to try to be honest with what Jim is trying to portray here, and he has asked, y'know, let's, I want to keep what we're doing secret. And, in my business, trust and confidence is really paramount, so you say, well, if that's what we're going to do, that's what we do, and to the extent that I don't even know the message. So, that's-- it's really his show and his ball. 
 Are you curious about the message? 
 ED SCHEIDT Not really. 
 Wouldn't you really like to know what it says? It's sitting out there, it doesn't have your name on it, but it's got your name behind it. 
 ED SCHEIDT Yeahp. That's good enough. Really. 
 Okay, well, thank you very much. 
 ED SCHEIDT Thank you. 
 Stay there for a second...(cut) 
 (looking over interviewer's shoulder) 
 ED SCHEIDT (mid-sentence)...there's a mystique to it, but that's really... 
 There are some things that you could discuss... 
 ED SCHEIDT Oh, of course.... No, in the case... but it would have to be different from this relationship here.... This relationship here is more on the secretive side. 
 Well, my number is right there on that card. You give me a call, I'd like to talk to you. (to someone off-camera) Okay, I'm gonna...This is going to wind up... Well, I dunno, it takes a lot to get Ed to laugh. 
 ED SCHEIDT (laughs) That's correct. 
 When I was in... actually in Saudi Arabia. I only learned two words in Arabic, well actually the whole time that I was there, but they were very important because I kept hearing them endlessly, endlessly. They were, "Mafi mashkeelah". Mafi mashkeelah means "No problem." 
 (laughs) 
 (cut) 
 
 1991-04-02 - ABC 
 This is a transcript of a portion of ABC's World News Tonight broadcast from April 2, 1991. 
 PETER JENNINGS Finally here this evening, the embarrassing secret of the CIA. Over the years the Central Intelligence Agency has studied and broken some of the toughest codes ever created. Tonight it's top code breakers are stumped by a puzzle that is quite literally staring them in the face every day. Here's ABC's John Martin. 
 JOHN MARTIN (CU LETTER) It is called cryptos, Greek for hidden. It is a curved copper screen of letters in secret code. (MONUMENT) It was dedicated five months ago at CIA headquarters. So far apparently the agency's code breakers can't figure out what it says. 
 JIM SANBORN Once the plate is deciphered I'm not convinced the true meaning will be clear even then. There's another deeper mystery. 
 JOHN MARTIN Sculptor Sanborn created the mystery after he won a 250,000 dollar commission three years ago. He says he decided to create a work that touches the hidden nature of the CIA. (JIM SCULPTING) He refuses to say what the message is. Could it have perhaps a subversive quality? 
 JIM SANBORN It could corrupt somehow. It might cause...that people at the agency to perhaps think of things a little bit more, less seriously. 
 JOHN MARTIN (STUDIO EXT/INT) Somebody, perhaps from the CIA, took the sculpture very seriously. (CIA BROCHURE) 
 JIM SANBORN A lot of strange things happened while I was doing the piece. There were people caught on ladders trying to look in my window and photograph the piece through my windows and they were run off by the police. 
 JOHN MARTIN To code his secret, Sanborn turned to a retired CIA cryptographer. Today, the CIA refuses to discuss the code in public. It insisted that Sanborn hand CIA Director William Webster an envelope containing the code and the message. At its dedication Webster praised the sculpture and called the code a test. So far nobody has passed it. 
 JIM SANBORN Sure sombeody will figure it out eventually and then personalities will change, you know. Ten years will go by, 15 years will go by and they'll forget what it says again. 
 JOHN MARTIN (SU) So an agency often synonymous with secrecy in the world has collected one more secret message to go along with the billions already here, confident that it can decipher it and if necessary keep it from the outside world. John Martin, ABC News, Langley, Virginia. 
 PETER JENNINGS That is our report on World News Tonight. I'm Peter Jennings. Have a good evening, we'll see you tomorrow, good night. 
 
 1998 - CIA 
 The following is a re-creation of the document that appears in the images which can be seen here . 
 The Puzzle at CIA Headquarters Cracking the Courtyard Crypto (U) David D. Stein 
 Editor’s Note: In the late 1980’s, under a GSA program, the CIA commissioned Washington artist, James Sanborn to create a series of sculptures for CIA’s new Headquarters building. Working together with Ed Scheidt, who was soon to retire from the Office of Communications, Sanborn created a sculpture named "Kryptos" (Greek for hidden) that was dedicated in 1990 and now resides in the northwest corner of the courtyard. The curving verdigris scroll contains an 865-character coded message that seems to flow out from a petrified tree and is located near a water-filled basin bordered by various types of stones. In the following article, David D. Stein describes how he has deciphered most of the secret message contained within the sculpture. 
 I looked down at the large number of yellow pages littering the top of my desk, obscuring its dark oak finish. Each page was covered in hundreds of alphabetic letters that, although they appeared to be arranged randomly, were really carefully laid out in columns of hidden order. For the past week or so, I had been feeling that I was close to a solution – but was I? As a hobby, I has solved many puzzles since I was a child, and I had discovered that the most difficult challenge was continually dealing with the nagging fear that I may be on the wrong track. The voice in my head would whisper, "Maybe you’re mistaken – maybe this first part of the Kryptos code is really not a polyalphabetic Vigenere Tableau after all – maybe it’s a different type of code entirely. Or maybe it is a Vigenere code, but it’s been double or triple encoded – or maybe it was encoded backwards, or maybe…." 
 This is the worst train of thought an amateur cryptanalyst can have – it goes nowhere, and it is tempting to give in to frustration at the seemingly infinite number of possible solutions and abandon the effort. So, as I had done dozens of times before, I pushed these thoughts away and pressed on. The thing to do, I told myself again and again, was simply to stick to what I knew to be the facts. Let the encoded text itself guide me, and keep speculation to an absolute minimum. I should follow my instincts occasionally, but then remember to always keep track of my assumptions and be prepared to revise my thinking if a hunch doesn’t work out. 
 And suddenly it happened – I was hit by that sweetly ecstatic, rare experience that I have heard described as a "moment of clarity". All the doubts and speculations about the thousands of possible alternate paths simply melted away, and I clearly saw the one correct course laid out in front of me. Taking a fresh sheet of paper, I slowly and deliberately wrote out a new column of letters, followed by another, and then another. I continued this for several pages, then computed mathematically which rows were most likely to represent the correct plaintext letters, and searched for logical combinations between adjacent letters. I tried to contain my excitement as I witnessed the miracle of letters slowly forming together into words, one after another. Within the next few hours, I had finished. After more than seven years encompassing some 400 hours of laboring over piles of paper covered with gibberish,, I was at last looking down at a paragraph of clear English text. I had broken out the first part of the Kryptos code. 
 A New Challenge 
 I don’t remember the first time I saw, or even heard about, the Kryptos sculpture in the courtyard. But each day as I walked past the huge, curved copper plates, I would look at their mysterious perforated inscriptions a little longer each time until gradually I was lured into an attempt to decrypt them. Like the character of Ishmael from Melville’s Moby Dick , I, too, embark on journeys, "… whenever I find myself growing grim about the mouth" or find my soul becoming "… damp, drizzly November." Rather than putting to sea as Ishmael would have done, however, my travels are journeys of the mind. By undertaking new challenges, I explore the mysteries at hand. 
 The author and courtyard crypto. CIA photo. (U) 
 I quickly became fascinated with the thought of that encoded message standing mutely in the Headquarters’ courtyard year after year, wordlessly taunting everyone to try to read its hidden message; indeed, at its dedication, the puzzle was offered to Agency employees as a challenge. I have always been interested in all different types of puzzles: I’ve spent weeks uncoupling bits of twisted metal that some sadist has carefully coupled; I’ve poured over endless permutations of logic problems that cheerfully describe groups of people with terribly contrived lives who, it seems, are constrained to sit at the dinner table only in unique arrangements; and I’ve patiently studied colored cubes, labyrinths, cryptograms, and pictures that have been jigsawed into thousands of identical pieces. But I have never before undertaken a puzzle anything like that represented in the Kryptos sculpture. 
 Because I’m not a professional cryptanalyst, I first needed to educate myself in the different techniques used in the field of cryptography. After working on the Kryptos code for a while, I soon learned that the basic problem-solving techniques that I needed for decryption were not so different from those that I used in my work as a technical analyst. And in my reading I also learned that codebreaking is more than just a fascinating hobby; throughout history, lives literally have been lost and saved due to cryptanalysis. It has been estimated that, for example, the war in the Pacific in World War II was shortened by at least a year as a result of the efforts of military cryptanalysts. 
 From the time I initially began sharing with people the progress I had made deciphering the code covering the Kryptos sculpture, I have had the interesting experience of being inundated with questions about it. By far the most frequent question asked is, "How much did you get paid for solving that thing?" (Many people seemed to think that there was some kind of prize involved.) The next most common question is, "How long did it take you to solve it?" Notwithstanding my wife’s dry riposte ("So long, that it almost wasn’t worth it"), this question is more difficult. I was not keeping track of the time, and in any event, I was not in any hurry to solve the puzzle. For me, when codebreaking ceases to be fun and begins to seem more like work, then it’s time to quit and start doing something else. My best estimate of roughly 400 hours seems about right, and I had been working continuously. 
 I had expected the most prevalent question to be, "What does the message say?"; this one, however only made it into third place, followed closely by (usually humorously) "Don’t you have anything better to do with your time?" Although I’m not sure just how to respond to this last one, I do like to talk about the progress I’ve made on the Kryptos problem. But I must confess that I am often hesitant to reveal the message without having an opportunity to provide a full explanation. 
 There are several reasons that I don’t like to just blurt out the solution to the Kryptos puzzle. First, it is important to remember that the message is still incomplete; I have not yet broken out the last 97 characters of the 865-character inscription. Second, the message is enigmatic and open to interpretation. Finally, I believe that simply presenting the solution without showing the methodology behind it is cheating people a little. The creators of Kryptos no doubt intended to inspire people to try to solve it for themselves. Merely showing the "solution" that I have derived steals away a little of the excitement and appreciation of the problem, and can discourage people from trying their own interpretations. 
 When asked to write an article for Studies in Intelligence , I became intrigued by the idea of trying to explain what can be a complicated and convoluted subject in a manner that could be understood by anyone. After it was suggested to me that it might well be impossible to explain the methodology concisely and in a nontechnical manner, I couldn’t resist taking up the challenge. The purpose of this article is not simply to reveal the content of the Kryptos message but rather to give the reader a sense of the exhilaration that is felt when solving complex problems after struggling with them for years. 
 Where to Begin? 
 When first confronted with the coded full text of the Kryptos sculpture, the task of deciphering it can seem formidable – even impossible. Even the most casual of observations, however, reveals that the writing on the sculpture is divided into two main pieces. One side (Figure 1) depicts a somewhat modified "Vigenere Tableau" (a series of alphabets used for the coding and decoding of text); the other side contains the actual coded message of 865 characters interspersed with four "question marks" (Figure 2). 
 One method for deciphering a code begins by counting up the number of times that each letter of the alphabet occurs throughout the message, a so-called frequency count. I saw no reason, however, why different sections of the Kryptos code could not have been enciphered with different coding schemes; if so, it would be necessary to perform frequency counts on each part separately. Looking through the code, I seemed to see different patterns throughout, but I wanted to quantify these impressions. Therefore, just as a starting point, I decided to count up the number of times each letter occurred for each row of the message depicted in Figure 2. By plotting these counts as a function of row for each letter of the alphabet (26 plots in all), I would be able to watch how often each letter was being used as the message evolved. In particular, if the count stayed approximately constant for a number of rows, this would indicate the same type of code that was being used for that part of the message. 
 
 Figure 1. One side of the Kryptos sculpture, depicting modified Vigenere Tableau 
 
 Figure 2. Opposite side of Kryptos sculpture, containing the coded message. 
 
 
 "Encryption Schemes" 
 A typical example of one of the 26 plots, for encoded letter "J," is shown in Figure 3. (Of course, these "J"s are not really "J"s at all, but are ciphertext letters representing plaintext letters of the alphabet.) It can be seen that the letter "J" occurred twice in the first row of the Kryptos message, once in the second row, and so on. I noted that there was a marked change in letter frequency occurring between rows 14 and 15; that is, from row 1 to 14 there were "J"s appearing in almost every row, but from row 15 to 25 there were no "J"s appearing at all. This indicated to me that rows 1-14 were encoded with a different type code than rows 15 and beyond. In addition, it appeared that the last two or three rows were encoded with a different type of code than the preceding rows. The dramatic change from row 14 to 15 was seen in virtually all 26 frequency plots. 
 
 Figure 3. Frequency of "J" occurrences by row. 
 Because of these results, I divided the code into a top section (rows 1-14) and a bottom section (rows 15-28). I then further divided the top section into three parts using the four question marks as the dividing points; I designated these portions as Parts I, II, and III, respectively (Figure 4). I began my attempts at deciphering with the 125 characters of part II mainly because the repetition of the "DQM" sequence occurring in the first 11 letters made this piece look more interesting to me than the other two parts. 
 
 Figure 4. Top section of Kryptos code, divided into three parts. 
 
 
 Frequency Counts 
 The frequency count is one of the cryptanalyst’s most powerful tools. By computing how often each letter appears throughout the message, one can determine important clues about the code employed. Figure 5 shows a typical frequency count of normal English text. 
 
 Figure 5. Normal frequency distribution for the English language. 
 Each bar represents the number of times that that letter occurs, on the average, for every 1000 letters encountered. This pattern adheres so tenaciously to our language that it is virtually impossible to write or speak without it betraying its presence. And even if one were to artificially construct a few sentences or paragraphs that do not follow this distribution, it would turn out to be so contrived that new patterns would inevitably develop. Because it is an essential and unavoidable part of our language, from a cryptanalytic point of view, the pattern is also a code’s greatest weakness. 
 In Figure 6, a frequency count for Part II of the Kryptos code is plotted. It is easily seen, from comparison with Figure 5, that the pattern is very different from the normal distribution for English. 
 
 Figure 6. Frequency count for Part II of Kryptos code. 
 In particular, the distribution appears much flatter. This is exactly what I would expect to see for a polyalphabetic substitution code, where the distributions for several different alphabets would tend to average out when combined. Because the modified Vigenere Tableau – a polyalphabetic substitution code – is inscribed on the Kryptos sculpture, it made sense to try this first as a working hypothesis for this part of the code. 
 Finding the Length of the Keyword 
 A common method for breaking a Vigenere code involves first determining the length of the keyword that was used to encipher the message. The code then can be broken up into its constituent single alphabets, called monoalphabets, and analysis performed on each cipher alphabet to determine to which Vigenere alphabet it corresponds. Once these Vigenere alphabets are determined, the code can easily be deciphered. Note that nowhere in this analysis is it necessary to actually resolve the content of the keyword. 
 To ascertain the length of the keyword used in Part II of the cipher, I needed to make use of a cryptanalytic tool known as the "index of coincidence," or I.C. This concept conveys the probability that, given a distribution of layers, any two chosen at random will be the same. The details are covered in the field of statistics, and they are not significant here; the formula and an example calculation is provided (see Box B) if anyone wants to repeat the analysis. The important point is that for any set of letters, the average value of the I.C. will range from 0.0038 to 0.066. The closer this average value to 0.066, then it is more likely that the letters represent a monoalphabet. 
 
 Example Computation of I.C. for 7 Alphabets (Kryptos Code Part II). 
 I first divided the text of part II into two single alphabets (corresponding to a two-letter keyword) and computed the average I.C., then divided the text into three alphabets and again computed the average I.C., then divided into four alphabets, and so on (see Box B for an example calculation using seven alphabets.) Finally, I plotted each average I.C. as a function of the number of alphabets (Figure 7). 
 It is easy to see from this figure that the correct key length for this piece of code should be eight because that number yields an average I.C. value of almost 0.063; thus, I knew that I needed to divide the code into eight separate alphabets (Figure 8). 
 
 Figure 7. I.C. vs. Number of Alphabets for Part II. 
 
 Figure 8. Part II of Kryptos code divided into eight alphabets. 
 Determining Which Vigenere Alphabets To Use 
 Now that I had the code divided into eight monoalphabets, I needed to determine which Vigenere alphabet corresponded to each of them. If the text of Part II had been much longer, the analysis would have been fairly straightforward; I could simply have performed a frequency count for each column and matched the resulting distributions to the English frequency count in Figure 5. The letter occurring most frequently would likely have corresponded to plaintext "E," and, because the Vigenere alphabets have a fixed order (cyclical permutation) the identities of the other letters could then have been found. From the example presented in Figure 9 (for the first column), however, it is obvious how impossible this method would be for the present problem: 
 
 Figure 9. Frequency count for first alphabet of Part II 
 With only around 15 letters available per alphabet, there are just not enough to determine any kind of alphabetic structure such as that seen in Figure 5. So now what? 
 I must admit that I got stuck at this point for many months. No doubt a professional cryptanalyst would know several ways to proceed, but I was unsure. And then on February 21st, 1998, I had a breakthrough. How well I remember sitting at my desk that day, with the bright sunlight beaming through the window and the birds chirping unusually loudly outside. Suddenly, I felt a burst of Divine Inspiration – the insights I had gained about the Kryptos code from hundreds of hours of work came together and combined with all I had learned about cryptography. Everything seemed so clear that I didn’t have the slightest doubt about how to proceed, and I was confident that my plan would work. 
 Once again I divided the message into eight separate alphabets. What had become plain to me was that if I wrote out on of the columns along with every possible permutation for each letter in that column, then exactly one of the resulting columns would contain the true plaintext letters. True, only every eighth letter of the message would be revealed (the first, ninth, seventeenth, and so forth), but I could similarly write out the permutations for every other column and then look for likely letter combinations along the plaintext (Figure 10). 
 One of these columns had to correspond to the correct plaintext letters for the first column of the message in Figure 8, but which one? 
 Looking across the columns (Figure 11), it can be seen that some appear less promising than others; those that contain a large number of uncommon letters (B, J, K, Q, X, Z), for instance (remember, these should now represent actual plaintext letters.) But this all seemed so subjective – and how could I tell which 
 column was the best choice? Columns 1, 5, 7, 11, 15, and 16 each contain at least five uncommon letters—very unlikely to occur in such a short message of only 125 characters, so I could rule these out. But what about the others? Column 18, for example, contains for "R"s, which is a very common letter, and only one "J" (an uncommon letter). But is that column more likely to represent the plaintext letters than column 22, which has two "E"s and four "O"s, and no "K"s, "J"s, or "Z"s? 
 
 Figure 10. First column of Part II with every possible permutation. 
 
 Figure 11. Permutations of first column, with uncommon letters in red. 
 I needed to quantify these observations mathematically. One way to do this would be, for each column to add up the normal English frequency count associated with each letter. Then the columns with the highest sums would be the best candidates to correspond with the true plaintext letters. Starting with column 1 for example, it can be seen from Figure 5 that letter "D" occurs 4.4 times (on the average) for every 100 letters in English, "F" occurs 2.8 times, "I" 7.4 times, and so on. I could have summed these up, but I learned in my studies that it is actually better to compute the sum of the logarithm of the frequencies instead. Thus, for the first column, log (4.4) + log (4.4) + log (3.8) + log (7.4) +…=7.3. One advantage of using the log of the values rather than just the values themselves is that the overall sums will be penalized for containing letters B, J, K, Q, X, and Z—that is, those with negative log frequency values—and will more dramatically reduce the overall score. The final log sums for each column are presented in Figure 12 (the table has been turned sideways for ease of presentation; the rows should correspond to the columns of Figure 11). 
 Again, the details of these calculations are not really important. The main point is that the rows in Figure 12 with the highest values are the most likely to correspond to the correct plaintext letters. 
 
 Figure 12. Log sum frequencies for each column permutation. 
 
 
 Words Start To Appear 
 It is easy to see from Figure 12 that the three highest log sum values correspond to the rows beginning with "R" (log sum=25.2), "T" (log sum=23.7), and "O" (log sum=24.8). These three values are significantly higher than any of the others. Now, I often imagine a professional cryptographer with a bag of special tools, not unlike a consummate locksmith or doctor, but consisting of alphabetic letter tables and charts rather than picks or scalpels. The English-language frequency chart and the I.C. were such tools, and now another one—the frequency table of initial letters common in English-language words—comes into play. In other words, how likely is it for a particular letter to begin a word? The letter "O" occurs as an initial letter an average of about 7.2 times per 100 words, and "R" only about 3.1 times. Because the letter "T" begins a word an average of 16 times per every 100 words, however, it is a good letter to try first. 
 Knowing that one of the most common words in English is the word "THE", and given that the first letter of Part II could very well be a "T", I naturally wanted to see what would happen if "H" were the second letter and "E" the third. But, once I chose these letters, I would then be committed to using all the other letters in these rows. The permutations with log sums for the second and third columns of Figure 8 are presented in Figures 13 and 14, respectively. 
 
 Figure 13. Probable plaintext for second column (red). 
 
 Figure 14. Probable plaintext for third column (red). 
 It was seen that the log sum frequency for the "H" row of Figure 13 is 29.4, and for the "E" row of Figure 14 is 30.5—certainly strong values, indicating that these rows were good candidates for being the current plaintext letters. More importantly, when these three alphabets were lined up, no obvious impossible combinations were seen (Figure 15): 
 
 Figure 15. Probable plaintext for first three column of Part II.   (sic) 
 What I was looking for here were contradictions, that is, combinations of letters that would not be possible in English, such as "AAA" or a "Q" that was not followed by a mandatory "U," for instance. Much to my delight, there were no contradictions found, and there were even heartening signs showing I was definitely on the right track. The word "AND" appeared in row 8, and an indication of the suffix "-TION" started to peek out from row 13. Best of all that "KNO" in the 15th row was an unexpected gift, because I knew the odds were extremely good that there must be a "W" following it. All I needed to do to find the next plaintext column was to write out the set of permutations for the fourth column of Figure 8, find the set that contained a "W" in the 15th position, and insert this column into Figure 15. 
 Now that I was looking for logical words, calculating the log sum frequencies was no longer necessary. I just had to pick out the one row in each set of permutations that best fit with the already selected columns of Figure 15. What a treat not to have to add up any more of those log frequencies! (I had done so many of these that, at one point, I had memorized all the letter frequencies and proudly showed off this "skill" to my very patient family, friends and co-workers.) Continuing on in this manner, finding the remaining letters for columns 5-8 was not difficult, and the final plaintext of Part II quickly fell into place (the message is read horizontally): 
 
 Figure 16. Plaintext for all eight columns of Part II. 
 I noticed a few surprises. First, the letter "X" seemed to be serving as a punctuation mark in the fourth and 13th rows—probably a period. That could have confused the decryption if it had occurred in the first few columns, but luckily it didn’t. Second, I saw that the first word was not "THE" after all, but "THEY." This was another bit of luck (or serendipity), because my initial assumption was wrong, but it still led to the right answer. Finally, I noticed that the spelling of "underground" in the 10th row was "incorrect." I was so disconcerted by this that I made one of my rare trips (only about my third) out to the Kryptos sculpture to doublecheck my copy. I actually put my hand out to feel the letter and confirm that I had it correct. But I hesitated to call it an error—it could also have been a purposeful effort by the code’s authors to make deciphering more difficult or possibly to provide a clue for interpreting a deeper part of the solution. 
 The next thing I did was to look at Part III of the code to see if it was encoded in the same way as Part II. Surprisingly, I quickly found readable plaintext forming from Part III, showing that what I was calling Parts II and III were really a single portion of code with a single encryption scheme. Although I wasn’t expecting this to be the case, it was a pleasant shock to get the remainder of the message with almost no additional work. 
 When I tried to decode Part I using the same scheme, however, I found that it did not work. The first two lines of Part I were encrypted differently than the rest of the top section, so that I had to start all over again, first computing the I.C.s under the assumption (which proved correct) that I was once more working with a Vigenere cipher for this part (Figure 17). 
 
 Figure 17. I.C. vs. Number of alphabets for Part I. 
 Although the graph was cruder than for part II because it was obtained from a fewer number of letters (note that some of the I.C.s seem to exceed the theoretical limit of 0.063), it was still obvious that a key length either 5 or 10 was being used. (These multiple high I.C. values were the result of the way the I.C.s were calculated. Because I.C. values are calculated by counting number repetitions within a column, columns split up into multiples of the key length (5, 10, 15, and so forth) will show up as additional peaks at these values.) I tried both, but it was 10 that proved to crack this part. I performed the same analysis as just shown previously for Parts II and III, and the final decryption for the entire top half of the code is presented here (Figure 18): 
 
 Figure 18. Completed plaintext for top section of Kryptos code. 
 
 
 Deciphering the Bottom Section 
 Of course, all the time that I was working away at the top section of the Kryptos code, I would take occasional breaks to look at the bottom section. I saw almost immediately that this section, like the top, was made up of different parts. From the frequency by row charts (Figure 3, for example), there was a strong hint that the last three lines or so were encoded with a different scheme. So I decided to divide the bottom section into two parts at the question mark, and called them Parts IV and V. 
 
 Figure 19. Encoded bottom section of Kryptos code. 
 Starting with Part IV, the first thing I did was call our my old friend, the frequency count: 
 
 Figure 20. Frequency count for Part IV. 
 Comparing this chart to Figure 5, it was obvious that the letters in Part IV were occurring with the same frequency as they occur in normal English. This implied that this part of the code must be encoded with a transposition code (see Box A). Interesting. The Kryptos code (so far) seemed to be encoded with the two fundamental types of codes—the substitution and the transposition. 
 Because Part IV was almost certainly a transposition code, I knew that all 336 letters were already in plaintext, but I needed to determine their correct ordering. At first, it seemed like an impossible task, with a tremendously large number of possibilities. After reading up on the subject, however, I soon realized that there were standard ways to encrypt a transposition code, just as there were for the substitution codes. And I had a hunch that the code’s authors may have used one of the most fundamental types of encryption. 
 In a basic columnar substitution code, the plaintext message usually is first written out vertically in matrix form, with a certain number of columns and rows; it may or may not be a square matrix (see Figure 21). The columns are then mixed around, and the new ciphertext is read horizontally from the rows. To decipher the message, the reverse procedure has to be carried out. 
 
 Figure 21. Example of a basic transposition code. 
 Defining the Problem 
 To read the Kryptos transpositional message, then, the first thing I needed to do was to determine the basic structure of the array; that is, ascertain into how many columns and rows the 336 letters were divided. For example, one solution might be to try 18 columns by 36 rows, because 18 times 36 equals 336. Another solution could be 56 columns by six rows. But the array does not need to be completely filled in; it could be, for example, a 17 x 20 grid, but with only 13 letters in the final row. So how would I know the right choice? 
 The big breakthrough took place when I realized that there were really only a finite number of possible solutions. I thought about the problem this way: suppose I constructed a simpler transposition message of, say, only 29 characters. (I arbitrarily chose 29 characters only as an illustration.) By investigating a much smaller message, I could concentrate on the mechanics of the code rather than be overwhelmed by the large number of characters involved. Further, because I had constructed this problem myself and therefore knew the answer, it would be possible to see the methodology required to solve it by working on the problem backwards. 
 I imagined how things would look if I only had the ciphertext, without any clues on how to solve it (Figure 22). I would first need to figure out how many rows and columns there should be, decide how to break up the original message into "pieces" (columns) of a certain length (call this length "R"), and then figure out how many letters should be in each piece. Once this was known, I would have to assemble the columns into the correct order before I could read the plaintext. 
 
 Figure 22. Deciphering a simple transposition code with array not completely filled in. 
 Looking at Figure 22, it is apparent that, when the array is not completely filled in there can only be pieces of length B or B-1, because the shorter pieces will always be just one letter shorter than the longer ones needed to fill in the array. Gradually, I realized that the mathematical relation should be as follows: 
 (B-1)x + By=29, or y=(29-Bx+x)/B 
 where x is the number of pieces of length B-1, and y is the number of pieces of length B. Because x and y have to be integers (pieces cannot consist of fractions of a letter), the condition that there are only a finite number of solutions is forced. So, for a given B, only certain y values are possible for each x. For example, if B=5: 
 x y 0 5.80 1 5.00 2 4.20 3 3.40 4 2.60 5 1.80 6 1.00 7 0.20 
 Because values of x greater than 7 will always yield values that are less than 1.0 (and therefore not positive integers), in this example there are only two possible choices for x: 1 and 6. 
 I was ready to try my model on the actual Kryptos code. Substituting the number of characters in Part IV into the previous equation, I obtained the formula: 
 y=(336-Bx+x)/B 
 I could then determine how many pieces of length B were possible to fit into the 336 characters inscribed 
 on this part of the sculpture. I had noted that Part IV began with the word "END." This could only be a coincidence, but I wondered if it could be a hint by the code’s author that maybe this word represented the final column in the grid. If true, this would imply either a grid made up mostly of columns of length 3 and 4 (that is, B=4), or else a grid made up of all column length 3 (B=3). The process of discovery is often intuitive as well as analytic, and, from working with the code for so long, I had gradually developed the strong feeling that the matrix seemed to consist of only a few long rows. My feelings were based on the realization that once the columns were finally assembled, they would need to be reordered into columns to make horizontal words. When I tried possible solutions using long columns, I found so many contradictions that I was forced to conclude that the columns could not be very long. 
 Finding the Columns 
 After many months of trying different ideas, based on the previous arguments, I finally decided to try B-4 as a working hypothesis. But I still needed to know how many words of length 4 and how many of length 3 there were. From symmetry, I had the feeling that the final three letters in Part IV represented a three-letter word, because I had hypothesized that the first three letters did. From the previous formula, I knew that there were only certain solutions that were allowable (x=0, y=84), (x=4, y=81), (x=8, y=78)… all the way up to (x=112, y=0). That is still 28 different solutions to check, but fortunately I tried them in order so that the correct choice of (x=8, y=78) was the third one that I considered: 
 
 Figure 23. Correct (but unordered) column arrangement for Part IV. 
 Re-ordering the Columns 
 I then needed to arrange the columns back into the correct order. (By the way, I should mention, if it is not already obvious, that I am presenting these steps in a certain order only for clarity. In reality, they were performed haphazardly, and I would often jump back and forth as new ideas came to me.) For this purpose, I reached into my cryptographer’s bag of tricks one last time and used something called a "digraphic frequency table." This chart depicts how often, on the average, any two alphabetic letters occur next to each other. For the first two columns in Figure 23, for example, the combination "YO" occurs 0.64 times per 1,000 letter pairs, "AH" occurs 0.13 times, and so on. By summing up these frequencies for each pair of columns, I was able to calculate which columns were most likely to occur next to each other and fit them back together like a jigsaw puzzle. The final solution is presented in Figures 24 and 25. 
 
 Figure 24. Ordered column for Part IV. 
 
 Figure 25 Correctly ordered text for Part IV. 
 The text appears to be a quote from a book by Howard Carte on the opening of King Tut’s tomb. Note the troublesome "Q" at the end. I tripped over this more times than I can remember. When I first looked at this part of the code, I thought I could use the "Q" to help me solve the message, because I believed it would absolutely have to be followed by a "U." But this turned out to be a false lead (one of many). 
 Wrapping Things Up 
 Even though it was not necessary to determine the keywords used in the substitution code in order to read Parts I, II, and III, I was curious to find out what they were. It was easy enough at this point: find the plaintext letters in the top row of the Vigenere Tableau in Figure I, follow those columns down until the ciphertext letter is found, and then read off the first letters of those rows for the keyword letters. (Because the Kryptos cipher actually uses a modified version of the Vigenere code, the alphabets down the left-hand side and along the top of Figure I first have to be removed for this to work properly.) It turned out that the 
 eight-letter keyword for the first two lines of Part I was "ABSCISSA," and the 10-letter keyword for Parts II and III was "PALIMPSEST," I knew what and abscissa was, but this other word was not familiar to me. I looked it up and found that it was "A written document… that has been written upon several times, often with remnants of earlier… writing still visible." Very interesting. Is the cipher trying to tell us that the Kryptos sculpture contains multiple layers of code—written one on top of the other? 
 I went back to the I.C. calculations for Part I and found a surprise when they were extended out to 16 alphabets: 
 
 Figure 26. I.C. vs. number of alphabets for Part I. extended to 16 alphabets. 
 I knew that the peak at m=10 was caused by the 10-letter keyword, and the peaks at 5 and 15 are expected artifacts of the keyword (at one-half and one-and-a-half times the keyword length, respectively). But what was this peak at m=13? Whatever it was, it also showed up in the I.C. plot for Part II (Figure 7). Could this be a sign of another code overlaid on top of the others—possibly one using a keyword of 13 letters? Or just a coincidence? 
 And what about Part V of the puzzle? I haven’t spent much time on this portion (our toddler, Joshua, has kept us very busy!), but there are interesting patterns in here as well. Although this part is in doubt more difficult than the previous pieces, I am confident that it is not impossible. I doubt that the code’s authors would get much pleasure out of writing an unbreakable code. 
 Final Thoughts 
 I hope I have inspired some people to study the Kryptos puzzle and to give it a try. Even the parts of the code that already have been decrypted still have to be interpreted for their deeper meaning. There are many pieces to be put together and many layers to be peeled away. 
 Nothing is more frustrating than reading a cryptography book where the author easily and in a straightforward manner shows how the code was solved. It is a little like reading one of those books on "How I made a million dollars." The methods typically work for that particular set of circumstances, but they often do not work in your particular case. Similarly, codes have distinct characteristics that frequently require each to be solved with a unique method. Because I did not see any need to dwell on the hundreds of things I had tried that didn’t work, the methodologies I presented may seem a little too straightforward and deceptively easy. As the adage goes, "If at first you don’t succeed"—and in cryptology you never do—"try, try again." If the methods that I tried had not worked, I would have tried others until I found something that did. 
 I genuinely enjoyed working on the Kryptos ciphers. Professional cryptographers almost certainly could have broken these codes much faster, and would have used superior methods. But I doubt that they would have derived as much satisfaction as I have. I didn’t use any computers to decrypt the Kryptos codes—just pencil and paper, some common sense, and a lot of perseverance. Using a computer would have cheated me out of the feeling of accomplishment that I obtained, because I’ve found that often in life the journey itself can be more gratifying than arriving at the final destination. Mountains are not climbed nor marathons run merely to reach a geographical location—there are much easier ways to accomplish these feats—but as personal and spiritual challenges to the participants. 
 When confronted with a puzzle or problem, we sometimes can lose sight of the fact that we have issued a challenge to ourselves, not to our tools. And before we automatically reach for our computers, we sometimes need to remember that we already possess the most essential and powerful problem-solving tool within our own minds. 
 
 1998-07-15 - ABC News 
 L I V E  E V E N T S BOARDS: World News Tonight: Crack the CIA Code… LIVE NOW What David Stein Has to Say Interview with CIA Analyst and Physicist Who Partially Deciphered ‘Kryptos’ 
 ABCNEWS.com 
 A transcript of an interview conducted July 15, 1998 with CIA analyst and physicist David Stein, 38, whose 400 hours of homework with pencil and paper has produced a partial deciphering of Kryptos, the copper plate sculpture encoded with a secret message by artist Jim Sanborn. The sculpture sits at CIA headquarters in Langley, Virginia. 
 Full transcript of an interview conducted July 15, 1998 with CIA analyst and physicist David Stein, 38, whose 400 hours of homework with pencil and paper has produced a partial deciphering of Kryptos, the copper plate sculpture encoded with a secret message by artist Jim Sanborn. The sculpture sits at CIA headquarters in Langley, Virginia. 
 In the interest of sportsmanship, we don’t want to give away all of David’s clues so the remainder of the interview will be posted the week of June 21st. 
 John Martin, ABC News: “What did you discover about this? 
 David Stein, CIA: The first thing I discovered is that there really is not a final solution. It’s multi-layered. Almost like an onion. One solution leads to another, leads you to another. It’s akin to putting together a jigsaw puzzle, and when you see the final picture, it’s then a crossword puzzle, and you need to solve that. 
 Martin: Is this entire piece of copper all one message? 
 Stein: No. It’s divided into two parts. And the message is really on that side (points to side facing his back). 
 Martin: And what’s on this side?st 
 Stein: This side is a series of tables. It’s a coding scheme, invented by a man named Vigenere and it’s called the Vigenere Tableaux. 
 Martin: What does this tell you? 
 Stein: This tells you how to encode part of the message, and also how to decode part of it. 
 Martin: Can you explain? 
 Stein: Yes. Usually the key word, letters come down the left hand side. The plain text, what you’re trying to encode, goes on the top. If the key word was apple, for example, and you were trying to encode the word ‘the,’ you would use the letter A for that alphabet, you’d come along to the first letter T and then read up at the top and you would take that for the encoded letter...The A tells you which of these alphabets to use to encode, so that would be...the A alphabet. 
 Martin: So then you’d run along here and look for the letter T. 
 Stein: The letter T, and then read up along the top, and that would give you the encoded letter. That’s why this is harder to break than other types of codes. Because the letter is encoded differently every time you use it. 
 Martin: So what did you do? 
 Stein: The first thing I needed to do was decide how many different codes were used. And it turns out there were at least two different coding schemes; actually, at least three. I started by looking at the frequency of letters as it was used throughout the table and how that changed over time. How it changed over position told me there’s probably one type of code in the first couple of lines, and then it moves down a little bit, and that’s another type of code, and so on. Actually, the first part is what’s called a substitutional type code. Where one letter is substituted for another. But not always the same letter. So A might be encoded by L, and the next time you see it, it might be encoded by Z. 
 
 Martin: Are there other kinds of codes, other than substitutional? Stein: Right. The next part is a transpositional. Martin: Transpositional. Meaning? 
 Stein: All the letters are the same that you’re going to use in the plain text, but they’re just rearranged. And you need to figure out how to rearrange them to get the message out. 
 Martin: How do you rearrange them? 
 Stein: You need to look for patterns. One think I did (was to) show mathematically that there’s only a finite number of solutions, and then I looked for letters that would belong next to each other. They’re called digraphic frequencies. You’re not likely to see an L next to a Z maybe, but you are likely to see an H following a C. That gave me clues about how to put it back together. 
 Martin: You found one coded and then another. Was there a third? 
 Stein: There was a third encoding scheme at the bottom, the last few lines of the code, which I have not broken. 
 Martin: How much of the message were you able to decode using this method. 
 Stein: In terms of letters, well, the message is 866 characters long; the last 97 characters I’ve not looked at. 
 Martin: That’s the part you haven’t cracked. Stein: I’ve not really even looked at it. 
 Martin: What do the first 700 letters tell you? What is the message from that? 
 Stein: The message is enigmatic. It’s actually sort of a puzzle. I have the solution with me. I think it kind of raises more questions than it answers. I think that’s the important message that I’d like to get out. It’s not been solved and we’re finished with it. This is the next phase now, we need to look at this. 
 Martin: You’ve got 700 out of the 800 or so characters? Stein: Something like that. Would you like me to read it? Martin: Yes. 
 Stein (reading): “Between the subtle shading and the absence of light lies the nuance of illusion.’ That was one code scheme there. Then the next code scheme reads: ‘They used the earth’s magnetic field, the information was gathered and transmitted underground to an unknown location. Does Langley know about this? They should, it’s buried out there somewhere. Who knows it’s exact location? Only WW. This was his last message. Thirty-eight degrees, 57 minutes, six point five seconds north. Seventy-seven degrees, 8 minutes, 44 seconds west.’ ID’ by rows.’ Or maybe it’s rows S. I’m not sure. That’s the top half of the message. 
 Martin: Do you know where that is on earth? 
 Stein: it’s approximately this location. How, whether it’s in the parking lot, I’m not sure, or the front of the building, or the center. 
 Martin: Very interesting, isn’t it? 
 Stein: But I need to point out a few things. There were misprints, there were typographical errors. And I’m using that term very loosely in here; I think they were on purpose. I think there are clues in those as well. 
 Martin: You think the artist was trying to throw you off the trail? 
 Stein: No. I think he was trying to say that those words that were misspelled mean something and that they’re clues to maybe another part of the message. 
 Martin: What does the second half say? 
 Stein: This is the transpositional part of the message, transpositional cipher. It turns out that this is a quote, someone told me this, I didn’t look it up myself, but a quote from (Howard) Carter’s book from the opening of King Tut’s tomb. And that’s very significant to me because he needed to go through multiple layers to get into that tomb. And I think that’s what’s happening with this message. There are multiple layers that we need to go through before we get a final solution. 
 Martin: And what does it say? 
 Stein: It reads: “Slowly, desperately, slowly, the remains of passage debris that encumbered the lower part of the doorway was removed. With trembling hands I made a tiny breach in the upper left-hand corner, and then widening the hole a little, I inserted a candle and peered in the hot air escaping from the chamber caused the flame to flicker, but presently details of the room within emerged from the mist. Can you see anything? And at the end, he has a Q, for example. And I don’t know what that Q means. 
 Martin: There are 97 characters left. What are you going to do? 
 Stein: I decided to solve this puzzle for fun. I was never in a hurry. It was a recreation to me. When it got to the point it was work, I would put it away, because that’s not what it’s about. And if I decide to look at it again, and I think I might do that in the future, I like to think that if you put enough time and effort into a code, or any kind of a puzzle, really, you can solve it. You can break it. 
 Martin: The image of the CIA is having a bunch of computers do this. Did you use computers? 
 Stein: Did not use any computers at all. In my opinion, computers are not always the solution for everything. In this case, a lot of people, I know, tried to use computers. They tried to brute force it by trying all possible key words. That’s really not the way to do it. 
 Martin: Nothing came of it? Stein: Not that I’m aware of. Martin: Who was using computers? 
 Stein: People have come up to me and said: ‘you know, I’ve tried to break this and they were showing me that they were using computer schemes. 
 Martin: Other people here at the agency? Stein: Other people at the agency, right. 
 Martin: Did you do this all by yourself? Stein: I did, yes. Martin: Did you have help from any people from any other agency? Stein: No. 
 Martin: We heard there was some NSA (National Security Agency) involvement. What was that? 
 Stein: I had heard that, too, but ah, you’d have to talk with them. Martin: (They) didn’t work with you? Stein: Did not at all, no. 
 Martin: How long have you been at the agency? Stein: I’ve been here about 12 years. Martin: So you were here when the sculpture was installed? 
 Stein: I was here, but I don’t remember it being installed, so I may have been out of town. 
 Martin: What got you to try this, now? 
 Stein: I’ve been working on and off, every couple of Sundays; I would look at it for a few hours, just recreational. 
 Martin: The Cold War is over. Was there just something that said: ‘Hey, this might be fun,’ or was there some other event that caused you to start working on this? 
 Stein: No, not at all. It was something I was working on over the last couple of years, just for enjoyment. 
 Martin: How many hours did you spend working on this? 
 Stein: I get asked that a lot. And I can only estimate. Something like 400 hours, maybe? If I had to piece it all together over the past, 8 years, 9 or so. I don’t know how long it would have taken me if I’d had a time limit, if I’d said:’Okay, you have four weeks to solve this. Let’s do it.’ But I was never in a hurry. In fact, it was kind of disappointing when I did get to the end. In the same way, when you read a good book, you’re kind of disappointed when you get to the end. It really was the journey, not the destination. 
 Martin: But you’ve still got a small mountain to climb. 
 Stein: small? It’s probably a large amount, because that is a more complex-type code. I can tell. 
 Martin: Now, did you do any of this on government time? Stein: No, not a lick. Martin: Not a second? 
 Stein: not a tiniest bit. I did it in my study at home, at my desk, where I do all my recreational work. 
 Martin: And you did this for recreation? Stein: Recreation, yes. (smiles) 
 Martin: Were you a cryptography by trade? By assignment? Or are you just an amateur cryptographer? 
 Stein: Strictly an amateur. 
 Martin: When you sat at your desk, what materials did you use? 
 Stein: I had lots and lots of blank tablets of paper. When you solve a problem like this, It’s like solving any other problem, whether it’s an intelligence problem, like I use in my work, or it’s a math problem for homework assignment. You let the data guy do it first. You look through it. You say: ‘What do I know, what don’t I know?’ Eventually you’ll get to a point where you won’t know what to do, and then you need to start making assumptions. And keep very careful track of those assumptions. And keep you need to keep backtracking, and say: ‘Well, that didn’t work out.’ And you try something else. I just burned up a lot of paper that way. 
 Martin: What do you think the final section says? What’s your assumption about that? 
 Stein: I have no idea. I was very surprised at the sections that I did break out, that read the way they did. 
 Martin: What do you mean surprised? 
 Stein: I wasn’t sure what I was expecting, exactly, but I was not expecting a section from a book by Carter. That was certainly a surprise. And I wasn’t expecting that there’d be sort of a riddle that you needed to then interpret. 
 Martin: Do you like the fact that there is a riddle in there? 
 Stein: Yes. Absolutely. I was asked if I wanted to put the solution that I came up with next to the sculpture. And I thought that would be ridiculous. It’s more fun for people to try for themselves. Maybe I’m on the wrong track. Maybe that was a trap that I fell into and somebody else will make better progress. And that’s really what the spirit of the sculpture was about. That’s why it was put out here as a challenge to the employees to try to break it. 
 Martin: Any of your colleagues come as close as you? 
 Stein: I’m not aware of anyone, but I’m not in contact with everybody. But there are people out here who do try this, who have been trying over the eight years. I gave a presentation in the auditorium at the end of March, and there were about 250 people there. And a lot of people came up to me afterwards, and said: ‘you know, I worked on this too.’ We compared notes. But I don’t think anybody’s come up to me and said: ‘oh, I did that five years ago.’ 
 Martin: Why is it important to have this challenge? 
 Stein: It reflects any type of problem solving. Even though it’s not directly related to my work, I am a technical analyst, and I need to solve problems where I don’t have all the data. You have to be very careful of your assumptions and not to fall into traps in the same way. You look at the facts that you do have, you make careful assumptions, and then you keep track of those and you go back again, and you see where you went wrong. And you could come out with the final solution. Really, all problem solving is based on this. 
 1999-06-15 - ABC News 
 L A N G L E Y,  Va.,  June 15 — Behind the Central Intelligence Agency’s headquarters, there’s a secret message waiting to be decoded. 
 To the delight of its creator, artist Jim Sanborn of Washington, the message remains a mystery to the agency and the hundreds of employees who relax in the courtyard where his sculpture stands. “ I don’t know that it will ever be totally figured out, ” says Sanborn. 
 Only William Webster, CIA director at the time the sculpture was erected, was given the decoded text, and he locked it in the office safe when he left the agency in 1991. 
 A Break in the Case 
 But finally, after all these years, there’s been a break. An analyst at the agency has deciphered part of the message. In fact, he’s deciphered two parts of the message. 
 The CIA public affairs office is quick to point out that each employee works to unravel the puzzle on his own time. Presumably, the agency’s computers, or those of the code-breaking National Security Agency, could unlock the message in a matter of hours or days. 
 David Stein, a 38-year-old CIA physicist, working at home nights and weekends for about 400 hours, has deciphered all but 97 of the letters. 
 This is part of what he deciphered: “They used the earth’s magnetic field. The information was gathered and transmitted underground to an unknown location.”     What location? If you know the code, the coordinates are there. 
 “Thirty-eight degrees, 57 minutes, 6.5 seconds, north. 77 degrees, 8 minutes, 44 minutes west. ID’ed by rows,” reads Stein. That is the approximate location of the sculpture.     
 We showed retired CIA cryptographer Ed Scheidt Stein’s work. Scheidt says Stein is on the right track. And he should know — Scheidt is the one who taught the artist how to encode his message. 
 As to the section Stein hasn’t been able to solve, Scheidt says, “That’s still a secret.”      And that’s how the sculptor wants it. “ I think it’s important that every piece of artwork holds one’s attention for as long as possible ,” says Sanborn. 
 Still, after nine years, the veil has been pulled back slightly. But the mystery continues, and the CIA says it still wants the message deciphered, if only to show it enjoys the challenge. 
 Your Turn 
 We invite you to try cracking the code. You can see the full code at the bottom of this page. Mull it over and then post your guesses on the message board above or use the board to discuss things with fellow cryptographers. And then we will see whether one of our readers can accomplish what the CIA has not in nearly a decade. 
 Need a Hint? 
 We have posted a partial transcript with an interview Stein to help you. Each day we will post a portion of what Stein has already deciphered. Look for it at the bottom of the yellow box. 
 
 
 1999-06-16 New York Times 
 Date: Wed, 16 Jun 1999 12:45:42 -0400 Subject: Markoff New York Times Article 6 16 99 June 16, 1999 
 C.I.A.'s Artistic Enigma Yields All but Final Clue 
 By JOHN MARKOFF 
 It has stood in a courtyard inside the Central Intelligence Agency for almost a decade, a sculptural mystery inside an enigma. 
 But last week Jim Gillogly, a Southern California computer scientist, did what has until now been done -- quietly, and incompletely -- only inside the agency's halls. 
 He succeeded in breaking almost all of a cipher embedded in a sculpture called Kryptos -- the Greek word for "hidden" -- that was dedicated at the C.I.A. in October 1990. 
 Since then, the 865-character message etched into the sculpture by the artist, Jim Sanborn, has defied all efforts to unravel its conundrum completely. Even Gillogly acknowledges that he has deciphered only its first 768 characters. Still unbroken are the last 97 characters, apparently the same section that has also stumped both the C.I.A. and the National Security Agency. 
 Sanborn said this week that the sculpture contains a riddle within a riddle -- one that will be solvable only after the four encrypted passages are known. The complete answer was handed to William H. Webster, the Director of Central Intelligence when the sculpture was completed, and has been held in confidence by his successors. 
 The tantalizing clues uncovered last week are likely to rekindle interest in a complete solution: The three sections include a poetic phrase, a reference to a point near the C.I.A.'s headquarters in Langley, Va. (with the enticing passage, "Who knows the exact location? Only WW"), and an excerpt from an account of the opening of King Tut's tomb 
 in 1922. 
 "I don't really have a good idea of what it might be," said Gillogly, a 53-year-old cryptographer at Mentat Inc., a Los Angeles software maker, who started designing cryptograms with his brother as a child in an effort to stump their father. 
 A computer hacker in the best sense of the word and a past president of the American Cryptogram Association, Gillogly (pronounced gill-OH-glee) began exploring the Kryptos message in 1992, but he abandoned it until nine days ago, when he saw it briefly alluded to in an Internet discussion group. 
 This time he was armed with a better weapon than the pencil and paper he had seven years ago: his home computer, a highly powered Pentium II. And the key to solving the first three sections of the message proved to be a program that Gillogly had written as part of his cryptographic passion. 
 The program, he said, is intended to help solve what he refers to as classical cryptographic systems used by kings, armies and spies before World War II. 
 Even with more computational power, he had to apply traditional cryptographic methods, using his logical powers of deduction. 
 "There was a fair amount of skull sweat," he said. "You work on it and you see something that is a little out of whack and you start pulling on it to see what unravels." 
 When he contacted the C.I.A's press office last week, Gillogly learned that he was not the first codebreaker to succeed at unraveling the first part of the mystery. 
 In February, David Stein, who works for the agency as a physicist and senior analyst, and not as a professional cryptographer, had quietly uncovered the same three passages. Like Gillogly, he has been stumped by the final section, although he believes that it will eventually be solved. 
 "The Kryptos puzzle is a layered puzzle," he said yesterday, and we may find that it has layers within layers within layers." Stein sounded a bit miffed when he learned that Gillogly had used a computer in his pursuit of the hidden codes. 
 "Kryptos was meant to be solved with pencil and paper," he said. 
 There were no written rules in this contest, Gillogly responded, adding: "As far as I'm concerned a crack is where you find it. The choice of tool isn't the important part, but rather the decisions about how to use the tools." 
 For his part, Webster, the former Director, said yesterday that he had long since forgotten the answer. "I have zero memory of this," he said. "It was philosophical and obscure." 
 But he sided with Gillogly on using a computer. "Who set the rules here?" he asked. "This is precisely what the agencies do when they try to break codes." 
 Sanborn, the artist, who has designed a number of sculptures that are puzzles, has said he believes that the ultimate secret hidden in the text of Kryptos will never be deciphered. It was designed by Edward M. Scheidt, a former chairman of the C.I.A.'s Cryptographic Center. 
 That has not stopped either Gillogly or Stein from speculating on what the full message may contain. And Gillogly has even contemplated exploring the bag of tricks of some of the world's acknowledged past spy masters in search of the complete solution. 
 "There're still those last few lines waiting to be decrypted," he wrote last week in an Internet discussion group. 
 "I'll review the 'Mission Impossible' movie for tips on getting into the vault, if all else fails." 
 
 Date: Wed, 16 Jun 1999 13:10:35 -0400 Subject: Re: Markoff New York Times Article 6 16 99 
 Article with the text of the solution. It is provided below: 
 
 June 16, 1999 
 The Kryptos Code Unmasked 
 Here are the first three passages of the code on the Kryptos statue as deciphered by Jim Gillogly, including misspellings (of "illusion," "underground" and "desperately"). The second passage identifies a location near the C.I.A. headquarters; the third is taken from Howard Carter's account of the opening of King Tut's tomb in 1922. 
 
 Related Article C.I.A.'s Artistic Enigma Yields All but Final Clue (June 16, 1999) 
 Between subtle shading and the absence of light lies the nuance of iqlusion. 
 It was totally invisible. How's that possible? They used the earth's magnetic field. x The information was gathered and transmitted undergruund to an unknown location. x Does Langley know about this? They should: it's buried out there somewhere. x Who knows the exact location? Only WW. This was his last message. x Thirty-eight degrees fifty-seven minutes six point five seconds north, seventy-seven degrees eight minutes forty-four seconds west. ID by rows. 
 Slowly, desparatly slowly, the remains of passage debris that encumbered the lower part of the doorway was removed. With trembling hands I made a tiny breach in the upper left-hand corner. And then, widening the hole a little, I inserted the candle and peered in. The hot air escaping from the chamber caused the flame to flicker, but presently details of the room within emerged from the mist. x Can you see anything? 
 Date: Thu, 17 Jun 1999 14:30:41 -0400 Subject: London Times article 
 June 17 1999 UNITED STATES Rivals chip at sculpture's code 
 FROM BEN MACINTYRE IN WASHINGTON 
 A CALIFORNIAN computer scientist has taken on the CIA's finest code-breakers to try to solve a riddle embedded in a sculpture outside the intelligence agency's headquarters in Virginia. 
 The sculpture Kryptos, the Greek word for hidden, was created in 1990 by Jim Sanborn with a secret 865-character message etched into its sides. It has presented a challenge to the CIA's cryptologists ever since. 
 Last week Jim Gillogly, a software designer from Los Angeles, said that he had deciphered all but 97 of the characters using a powerful home computer and his own cryptographic software, which incorporates 1930s code-breaking techniques. 
 He said that the first three sections of code contain a line of poetry, a reference to the discovery of Tutankhamun's tomb in 1922 and clues to a point on the map near the   CIA's Langley headquarters. So far Mr Gillogly has failed to crack the crucial final section of the puzzle. 
 Mr Sanborn will say only that the cipher is a "riddle within a riddle", soluble only when four encrypted passages are each unravelled. The answer to the puzzle was handed to the CIA director William Webster in 1990 and has since been handed down in secrecy to his successors. 
 Mr Sanborn's sculpture, like its message, is multilayered, created out of granite, quartz, lodestone, copper and water. It stands directly outside the CIA cafeteria as a tantalising reminder to the agents inside of their limitations. 
 Mr Gillogly has deciphered an apparent reference to Mr Webster: "Who knows the exact location? Only WW." But if the solution to Kryptos hinged on Mr Webster's memory, it would never be solved because he has forgotten the answer. "I have zero memory of this. It was philosophical and obscure," he said, cryptically. 
 
 1999-07-17 - Washington Post 
 Cracking the Code of a CIA Sculpture By John Schwartz Washington Post Staff Writer Monday, July 19, 1999; Page A01 
 It had reached the point that David Stein was seeing the letters in his head before drifting off to sleep at night. Arrayed in seemingly meaningless order on the copper sides of "Kryptos," an oddly powerful sculpture at the headquarters of the Central Intelligence Agency, they had guarded a secret since the artwork was dedicated in October 1990. 
 The 865 characters on the sculpture are only about as many as appear in the first dozen or so paragraphs of this article. But, placed there as a whimsical challenge, they have stumped and obsessed cryptographers around the world for nearly a decade. 
 "Kryptos" rests in a courtyard in the agency's closely guarded campus. The dense matrix of letters runs across a curving verdigris scroll that emerges from a column of petrified wood. There is a small, water-filled basin with other stones laid around, creating a quiet setting that encourages contemplation. 
 Stein, an intense physicist who works in the CIA building, rarely walked outside to look at it. He had written out the garbled message and played with the arrangements of the characters in his spare time, putting them through different combinations and waiting for hard work and intuition to give him a breakthrough. 
 And then, after more than 400 hours of brainwork, he realized he'd begun to crack it. 
 The letters were lining up, making sense . "I'd have to call it like a religious experience," he recalls. 
 Stein's epiphany came in February 1998, and within months he had cracked all but the last, 97-character passage on the sculpture, which hide behind an even tougher cryptographic system. His feat got little attention outside the CIA at the time. But when another amateur codebreaker, California computer scientist Jim Gillogly, stepped forward recently to announce on the Internet that he had made sense of all but those same 97 characters, Stein's accomplishment also came to light. 
 On its face, the quest for its meaning is merely a nerd game. But on a deeper level, it's about the deep human urge to solve puzzles, to learn secrets – to prove you're smart. Never mind that the CIA offered no reward, set up no rules and put the sculpture in an area off-limits to the public. 
 Taking a Dual Approach 
 The two cryptographers now are playing out a modern-day John Henry legend, man against machine. Stein accomplished the feat with pencil and paper alone,the method preferred by the traditionalist creators of "Kryptos." Gillogly has taken a high-tech approach, supplementing his analytical skills with computer programs of his own design. The National Security Agency confirms that three of its cryptographers, working on their own time, also have gotten to the same point in cracking the message, but declines to identify them or give details. 
 The story of this composition in copper, stone, water and code begins in the late 1980s, when the General Services Administration was looking for art to grace public buildings around the nation, including CIA headquarters in McLean. 
 Washington sculptor James Sanborn, whose work often deals with mystery and hidden forces of nature, jumped at the chance to do a sculpture for the intelligence agency. He proposed an artwork that contained its own puzzle, and the agency quickly agreed. He had done research into cryptography, but wanted help coming up with an encryption method. He recalls thinking over his options: "Maybe the Israelis. Maybe the Russians? Just go over to the embassy – wouldn't they love that?" 
 Ultimately, he went to the CIA itself. The agency put him in touch with Ed Scheidt, the retiring chairman of its Cryptographic Center, and hailed by then-director William Webster as "The Wizard of Codes." A quiet, professorial man who favors ties with hieroglyphic patterns, Scheidt spent four months devising the systems that Sanborn would use. 
 For Scheidt, the project presented a chance to teach, not just Sanborn, but those attempting to break the puzzle as well. "I could use methods to encrypt it that had a historic basis – that didn't compromise any current methods" of cryptography used by the government, Scheidt says. Sanborn and Scheidt wanted "to make something that could eventually be deciphered or extracted, rather than something that will never be done, ever," Scheidt says. 
 With the code system in hand, Sanborn set to encrypting the message he had chosen for his artwork. He did it on his own, during a four-day jag trucking the huge piece of petrified tree from Arizona for the sculpture. 
 When he dedicated the completed work, Webster called "Kryptos" something that "speaks to a sense of place." He told Sanborn, "You have captured much of what this agency is about." 
 Scheidt figured that the first chunks of the puzzle would stand a few years; the last part, perhaps ten. He didn't know his own strength. 
 Labor of Love 
 Over the next eight years, Sanborn said, he was contacted repeatedly by amateur code-breakers hoping for advice, a clue, anything. " About every couple of months, sometimes more somebody would call me up. ... I had nothing whatsoever to do with any of these people ," he said with disdain. 
 Some were working from photographs, but Sanborn had placed the stones around the sculpture strategically, so that a photo could not capture all of the elements. Transcriptions of the letters had begun floating around the Internet, but most of them did not fully show the slight misalignment of some letters along the matrix, which might figure in unlocking the secrets. 
 Stein, now 38, had barely noticed the sculpture in its first years. A puzzle-solver at heart, he'd never had much interest in cryptography. But friends suggested he give it a look, and he read a small shelf of books on the subject. 
 Gillogly was at work too. "The first step is to go at it with a mindset that it's going to be breakable," he recalls. "The second step is to go at it 'til you get something." 
 Both men quickly realized Scheidt's underlying goal: "the sculpture is, in some sense, a history of cryptography," noted Gillogly, a past president of the American Cryptogram Association. 
 The first two sections, they found, are based on a system of tables similar to methods attributed to 16th Century French cryptographer Blaise de Vigenere that substitutes letters throughout a message, shifting from one alphabet order to another with each letter. The third section uses another of the great historic cryptographic schemes: transposing letters, or changing their position in the message according to an ordered plan. 
 Language Patterns Emerge 
 Much of the initial work involves counting the occurrence of each letter and performing a statistical analysis on those counts, since many crypto-systems reflect the patterns of language. The letter E is simply going to occur more often than other letters – roughly 130 times for every thousand letters, in fact – and that frequency can help a codebreaker begin to determine how the letters have been scrambled. 
 Stein and Gillogly (he has never actually seen the sculpture, relying on transcriptions) went through hundreds of false starts. They tried one approach after another, getting gibberish as a result. 
 Stein worked things out in his head, analyzing avenues of attack and then writing out the results, one test after another. "There's probably a thousand things to do – I probably did 900 of them," he recalls with a sheepish smile. 
 Gillogly would use a similar process of thinking up the attack, but left the trial and error work to his PC. The machine didn't do the thinking; it merely eliminated drudgery, Gillogly argues. "It's very easy to say, 'Throw one of the ... NSA supercomputers at a problem and it will be solved.' " But "computer programming and computer solving are not as easy as that ... there was quite a lot of skull work." Just as Stein was comfortable with pad and pencil, "I think best with a computer in my hands," Gillogly says. 
 Of the two, Gillogly is more representative of today's codebreakers, who tend to be computer-savvy and Internet-wired, constantly communicating with others in the idiosyncratic crypto community of mathematicians, computer scientists, academics and cranks. Stein, on the other hand, doesn't even have an e-mail account. 
 Stein says he would drop the problem during periods of intense work, or when he was doing the final work on his masters degree. But he always came back, "Sunday afternoons, things like that," keeping detailed notes of his attempts. "It's sickening, but it gets to the point that you're lying in bed and playing with this in your mind," Stein says. "That's the 'get a life' part, I guess." 
 Close to a Breakthrough 
 Then in February 1998, "I felt I was close to it ... It's hard to describe the feeling of the breakthrough." On a hunch, he was working from the assumption that the first letters of the passage he focused on were "T" and "H," for "the." He had been hashing and rehashing letter sequences to find the alphabets that were being substituted for the original message. The letters "T" and "H" finally lined up properly. There were still several thousand potential combinations to work through to get the rest of the letters, but "suddenly, at this point, I clearly saw the right path." 
 "I actually had a hard time calming down enough to proceed," Stein recalls. (As it turned out, that first word was "They," not "The" – a lucky coincidence that still allowed Stein to move forward.) When he actually had completed the passages, Stein recalls, "I was a little disappointed. ... It was like [finishing] a good book." 
 Stein told friends about his partial success, and they suggested that he conduct a briefing. Stein agreed, and prepared quite a few viewgraphs, even though he expected perhaps 30 people to show up. In fact, once word got out that the puzzle had been largely cracked, the event had to be moved to an auditorium; some 250 people showed up. "Ed came up to me after the briefing," Stein recalls, "and said 'the solution is correct, but you didn't do it in the way I intended you to do it.'" 
 The answer? In some ways, it as mysterious as the rest of the puzzle. The first passage reads: "Between subtle shading and the absence of light lies the nuance of iqlusion. " Sanborn, it turns out, introduced a few misspellings to throw the codebreakers off the scent. 
 The second part contains a veiled reference to former CIA chief Webster; Sanborn gave Webster the key to deciphering the message, and the agency suggests but won't confirm that it has been passed from director to director since. The passage includes the latitude and longitude of the CIA's headquarters, and this: "Does Langley know about this? They should: it's buried out there somewhere. X Who knows the exact location? Only WW." 
 The third passage comes from Egyptologist Howard Carter's account of opening King Tut's tomb – a passage Sanborn says he has loved since childhood: "Slowly, desparatly slowly, the remains of passage debris that encumbered the lower part of the doorway was removed. With trembling hands I made a tiny breach in the upper left-hand corner. And then, widening the hole a little, I inserted the candle and peered in. The hot air escaping from the chamber caused the flame to flicker, but presently details of the room within emerged from the mist. x Can you see anything?" 
 It's about the thrill of discovery , Sanborn says. 
 Sanborn suggests that even after the text is decrypted, there will be riddles of analysis to come. " I think all art should be subject to as many interpretations as possible. ... If there's nothing more to discover about it, then it's not a very interesting artwork." 
 An Artist's Reward 
 Scheidt says he is happy to see the sculpture he helped create continue to engage the attention of people around the world. "Most people talk about cryptography, they remember it in the context of the cryptoanalyst," like the World War II geniuses who cracked the Axis codes. "Very few people actually talk about the person who designs the thing," says Scheidt, who founded a Vienna cryptography company called TecSec after leaving the CIA. 
 The last 97 characters? Don't hold your breath. Scheidt says with satisfaction, "I saved the best for last." 
 "No clues, sorry." 
 In an e -mail message, Gillogly says he's working away on them. "I've tried on the order of 20 billion trial decryptions spread over two dozen different systems with perhaps 5 or 10 variations each, on average. ... It's all pretty much shooting in the dark, since you don't know you've gotten close until you hear a scream. :)" In e-mail, that final symbol signifies a joke. 
 Gillogly wants hints badly, asking whether Scheidt or Sanborn has let anything slip in interviews; his jovial voice belies an undertone of hunger, even in e-mail. "Please give Jim Sanborn my regards and let him know I'm still plugging hard on the last 97 ... and pump him for clues for all you're worth!" 
 For his part, Stein says he doesn't want help. He got this far on his own, and that's how he intends to finish the job. For now, however, he's got a bigger puzzle on his hands: raising his first child. If he's not the first to break the last passage, he doesn't want to know what it says; he will return some day to crack it himself. 
 "Even if it's solved, I won't look." 
 
 1999-08-26 - NPR 
 88/26/1999 NPR’s All Things Considered::Kryptos Sculpture Mystery (8:02) URL:: http://www.npr.org/ramfiles/atc/19990826.atc.17.ram NA – Noah Addams LW – Linda Worthheimer DS – David Stein JS – James Sanborn Transcribed By: Jew-Lee Irena Lann 
 NA: This is NPR's All Things Considered. I am Noah Addams.. 
 LW: and I am Linda Worthheimer. In a pleasant courtyard, inside the Central Intelligence Agency Headquarters, in Langley Virginia, there is a sculptured fountain. Since there are no public spaces of Langley, you have to be brought onto CIA grounds to see it. A large log of petrified wood stands upright in one side, and unfurled from that log is a curved page, covered with letters. The scroll-like page is made of copper, and the letters are cut right through it. The sculpture is called Kryptos, the letters, are a coded message. For eight years, it stood in the courtyard, keeping its secret. 
 DS: I actually became gradually aware of it. I saw it in the courtyard, and every time I passed it, I took sort of increasingly long looks at it. I don’t know remember the exact date that I began trying to decipher it, uh... but I’ve always been interested in codes, and different types of puzzles, since I was a child. 
 LW: David Stein was trained as a physicist. he’s worked with the VIS for 14 years. He’s a Senior Analyst. James Sanborn is the sculpture who created Kryptos. And with the help of a former CIA Cryptographer, devised its encoded messages. 
 JS: Something hidden, something secret was the distilled CIA and the thing that struck me the most significant with these people. ..tremendous number of people, at the agency, lived their whole lives with a secret....that they could never tell anyone. I was never able to keep a secret, very well at all. [Woman laughs] So I sa..So I figured the best way for me to do a project for the CIA was perhaps to become privy to information which I then had to keep secret for the rest of my life, and that’s what I did. 
 LW: James Sanborn has been freed from some of that of that obligation, because part of the code of Kryptos has been cracked. David Stein is the only person, inside the CIA, whose deciphered part of the message. He did it with pencil and paper, using the alphabet table which are part of the curled page of the sculpture. A key,.. a hint, included in the piece. Stein knew that alphabet codes are almost always a substitution of one letter for another, or a transposition, using a letter several spaces down the alphabet. The first part of the message appeared to be a substitution code. In the fourth line, he noticed the letters “DQM” five characters later, the same combination. He began there. “Kryptos became”, he said, “a hobby”. He spent a more and more of his free time on the code...for several years. 
 DS: I don’t consider it obsessed, but I think to do a project like this you have to kind of steep yourself in the problem. You can’t look at it ..at least I can’t look at it casually. I have to look at it to the point, where my subconscious kind of takes over the problem and then you do find yourself thinking about it sometimes at night, or when your laying in bed, or...or even when you are talking with somebody. I don’t consider that being obsessed necessarily, that’s just like a methodology to me. 
 LW: Stein could see there were several sections to Kryptos and more than one code. He broke the substitution code first, looking for the relationship between letters. And then he realized the first three lines, of the message, were of different substitution code, but breaking that one went quickly. The first letters incised in the copper sheet are “EMUFPHZLRFAX”... and so on. Stein determined that the message begins: Between subtle shading and the absence of light lies the nuance of illusion*. 
 DS: It was February 1998, it was a..a date that ..uh.. will always be in-ingrained on my memory. And I remember, very clearly, sitting at my desk at home and ..uh my wife was..was out, I believe, shopping. And ..uh.. I had a ..uh.. I can only describe it as a mom-moment of clarity or a religious-type inspiration when ..uh.. suddenly everything just fell into place ..uh.. with almost an audible click. And I..I had no doubt whatsoever as to..as to how to proceed. 
 LW: So, once you got the ..uh.. first chunk, then how long did it take you to ..uh.. to get to the second keyword and the second part. 
 DS: It was..it was pretty much the same day or maybe the next day. 
 LW: So it went very fast after that? 
 DS: Yeah, the hardest part was getting my..my heart rate to decrease. I..I was very very excited. The feeling when you get when you get a breakthrough like that is..is difficult to explain. It seems to me it’s like it’s a high. Yo..your pulse is racing, yo-your sweating, and..and you just have to stand up for a while [DS Laughs] before you can get yourself seated down again. I remember my..my wife came home and I am trying to explain to her ..and well ..”that’s nice”.. [DS Laughs] it hard to convey the excitement[LW Laughs]. 
 LW: The middle of the message, once decoded, sounds like a secret dispatch. Giving map coordinates, locating CIA headquarters, but the last part, another code a transposition code, is a quote. It is Howard Carter’s account of the opening of King Tut’s Tomb. It begins “Slowly, desparatly slowly, the remains of passage debris that encumbered the lower part of the doorway was removed. With trembling hands I made a tiny breach in the upper left-hand corner. And then, widening the hole a little, I inserted the candle and peered in...”** The sculpture, James Sanborn: 
 JS: It was probably the most exciting thing I ever read as a child. I started out life as an Archeologist. Thought that’s what I wanted to be. Found it very exciting to discover things, whether it’s an arrowhead or a shark’s tooth, on a beach, or a dinosaur’s bone or ..An artifact. And..and that moment of discovery was very exciting. And think that same moment of discovery is what a cryptographer feels when they decode a message that’s been hidden for years. And so a I choose that statement as a..to demonstrate or to really give the essence of the feeling of discovery. 
 LW: There are still 97 characters left of the last message. The last code is different, and so far no one has broken it. David Stein has glanced at it, but he’s a new father now, and has other things to do, and no one else has stepped forward with a solution. Sculpturer James Sanborn speaks guardedly about it, not wishing to give any clues. Except to hint of the possibility that there is more than the solution than the last 97 letters, carved into Kryptos. 
 JS: There are encoding systems which use pattern: light and shadow. And it’s those kinds of systems that I was most interested in using, because I am an artist. And I chose not to use...in..in , at least what’s be deciphered already, perhaps what has not been deciphered ..um.. I like to use spacial systems of encoding and decoding. 
 LW: So are you saying is that “.. subtle shading and the absence of light .. then 
 
 1999-12 - Dr. Dobbs Journal 
 The Art and Science of Cryptography 
 Dr. Dobb's Journal December 1999 
 While there's no question that cryptography is a science, you could argue that, like many scientific disciplines, it's also an art. What you can't dispute, however, is that with his sculpture "Kryptos," James Sanborn has wonderfully merged the art and science of cryptography. Located in the courtyard of the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency since 1990, Kryptos (Greek for "hidden") is a curved, scroll-like 10-foot tall copper plate with 2000 letters of the alphabet cut through it. The characters on the left side of the sculpture constitute a table (the "Vigenere Tableau," developed by the 16th-century cryptographer Blaise de Vigenere) for deciphering/enciphering the coded message. Those on the right make up the secret message that can be decoded using the table. 
 As you might expect, posting a coded message -- especially one 10-feet tall -- in the midst of the CIA is like waving a red flag in front of a Cold War bull. That's one reason cryptographers, mathematicians, computer scientists, and others have been trying to crack the secret code for nearly a decade. Still, only Sanborn, former CIA director William Webster, and possibly one other person knew the contents of the message -- until recently, that is. 
 After all these years, David Stein, a physicist and senior analyst at the CIA, has deciphered all but 97 characters of the message -- and amazingly he did it without a computer. Working at home in his spare time, Stein spent nearly 400 hours over several years working with pencil and paper. In a fascinating pair of interviews on abcnews.com ( http://more.abcnews.go.com/onair/ worldnewstonight/wnt990618_stein_intv.html) and National Public Radio's "All Things Considered" ( http://www.npr.org/programs/atc/990826.kryptos.html ), Stein describes the methodology and thrill of breaking the secret code. 
 According to Stein, Kryptos uses what appears to be a minimum of three encoding schemes -- substitution (where one character is substituted for another, but not always the same letter), transposition (where the characters are the same as in the plain text, but rearranged), and finally a mystery code(s). Stein broke the substitution code after discovering the pattern "DQM" in the first few lines of the plain text, then he went on to the transposition code. (The complete encrypted code, Vigenere table, and other information is available at the abcnews.com site.) 
 What Stein ultimately discovered was that the entire message is about 850 characters long; in deciphering the first two parts, he has about 768 characters comprising two messages. The first message is somewhat cryptic, starting out "Between the subtle shading and the absence of light lies the nuance of illusion," then going on to give the global coordinates for CIA headquarters. The second message is a quote from Howard Carter's The Tomb of Tut-Ankh-Amen (Dover Publications, 1977, ISBN 0-48-623-500-9), which describes the opening of King Tut's tomb. 
 Stein finds this quote significant since, like his unraveling of Kryptos, Carter went through multiple layers of secrecy to get into the tomb. But why this book? In the NPR "All Things Considered" interview, Sanborn said that The Tomb of Tut-Ankh-Amen is the most exciting book he has ever read, adding that Carter's moment of discovery is akin to "what cryptographers feel when they decode a message that's been hidden for years and so I chose that statement to demonstrate -- or really give the essence of -- the feeling of discovery." 
 As for the third coding scheme and the message hidden in it, Stein is as mystified as everyone else. But even though the last 97 characters: 
 OBKRUOXOGHULBSOLIFBBWFLRVQQPRNGKSSOTWTQSJQSSEKZZWATJKLUDIAWINFBNYPVTTMZFPKWGDKZXTJCDIGKUHUAUEKCAR 
 remain unbroken, Sanborn isn't giving anything up. In fact, as Stein points out, there may be multiple layers of encoding that make the last part significantly more challenging than the first two. Sanborn hinted as much in the NPR interview, stating that "there are encoding systems which use patterns, light, and shadow, and it's those kinds of systems I was most interested in using because I'm an artist." 
 As impressive as Sanborn's sculpture is, what shines through is Stein's problem-solving ability. His methodology for cracking the Kryptos code involves looking at the facts, making careful assumptions about them, and keeping track of the entire process. Then when you go back and review what you've come up with, you can usually see where you went wrong. 
 All in all, that's pretty good advice for solving all kinds of problems -- coded messages and otherwise. 
 
 2000-03-16 - Baltimore Sun 
 Unlocking the secret of 'Kryptos'; Cryptogram: For nearly a decade, a jumble of seemingly random letters on a sculpture at CIA headquarters has mystified experts who have tried to decipher its code. 
 By Tom Bowman Baltimore Sun 
 LANGLEY, VA. — LANGLEY, Va. -- They spent more than three decades cracking foreign codes for the ultrasecret National Security Agency. Now, Dennis McDaniels and Ken Miller may have met their match in a peaceful courtyard in suburban Virginia. 
 This is not just any courtyard. It joins the new and old buildings of the Central Intelligence Agency, the NSA's sister agency and long-time rival. In one corner rises "Kryptos," a 10-year-old sculpture of curving bronze and petrified wood -- and inscribed with a secret message. McDaniels, Miller and an assortment of other sleuths, including a physicist at the CIA, have been trying to decipher it off and on for eight years. 
 To the untrained eye, "Kryptos" is a jumble of seemingly random letters on a grillwork greening with age. But code-breakers view it as a rock climber would a towering and unexplored sheet of granite. 
 McDaniels and Miller were part of a four-member NSA team that almost reached the top of that cerebral cliff before they became stranded in December 1992, unable to spot a fissure that would propel them those final feet. 
 They were able to decipher three of the code's four parts, 768 characters. The final 97 characters remain a mystery. The decoded messages include a poetic passage referring to "subtle shading" and "the absence of light," the longitude and latitude for CIA headquarters, and the breathless account of archaeologist Howard Carter on opening King Tut's tomb in 1922. 
 "We always believe it will be broken," says McDaniels, a quiet and affable retired cryptanalyst, who still tinkers with the remaining section while lying on his couch at home watching television. 
 "You couldn't be in this business if you didn't think it was possible," adds Miller, a trim former Marine who served in a reconnaissance unit in Vietnam before spending 31 years on the less hazardous duty of code-breaking. 
 When the final section is decrypted there will still be work to do. The four passages in the sculpture pose a riddle whose solution is in the office of CIA Director George J. Tenet, one more secret passed down from his predecessors. 
 "Kryptos," Greek for "hidden," is the work of Washington sculptor James Sanborn, whose work often employs cryptograms. One of his cryptic sculptures was unveiled last month outside the Smithsonian's Hirshhorn Museum; another perplexes students and faculty at the University of Connecticut. 
 To complete his sculpture at the CIA's parklike headquarters, Sanborn turned to Ed Scheidt, the agency's retired chief of cryptology, known among the shadowy types as the "Wizard of Codes." 
 Scheidt spent several months designing a code, though not as indecipherable as those employed to protect government secrets. 
 "Its intent was to last roughly five years; it was modeled along those lines," says Scheidt. As the message progressed on "Kryptos," he made the passages tougher to break. 
 "There was a change in the methodology," he says. "It was intentional." 
 Without providing details, Scheidt says the riddle's answer addresses the painstaking work of gathering and analyzing intelligence. In this veiled world, what seems apparent can be a distortion and the truth is learned by peeling back the layers, much like deciphering "Kryptos," Scheidt explains. 
 When the sculpture was unveiled in November 1990, then-CIA Director William H. Webster praised Sanborn's work. "You have captured much of what this agency is all about," he said. "We like to be tested. And we enjoy a challenge." 
 And apparently the CIA likes to challenge others to mental gymnastics. 
 Two years after the ceremony, Adm. William O. Studeman, the CIA's deputy director and a former NSA director, asked whether the NSA's cryptanalysts had the intellectual muscle to solve the "Kryptos" mystery. 
 "He laid the challenge down, 'You guys are so hot, let's see how hot you are,'" recalls Miller, who refers to a small black notebook that includes key dates and developments in their quest. 
 The NSA's director, Vice Adm. John M. "Mike" McConnell, announced the challenge during a ceremony inside the agency, then called for the creation of a team of cryptanalysts to try to break the code. 
 Miller headed the four-member group. They worked on their own time, during lunch hours, before and after work. They e-mailed each other hints and gathered in the cafeteria to pore over the hidden text. 
 They used a personal computer to do the "grunt work" of cryptanalysis, looking for the "frequency distribution" of various letters that might help unlock the mystery. By the end of November 1992, the team broke three of the four sections. McDaniels solved part three on his living-room couch. The NSA team worked on the code for another month without making further headway. 
 "It's always frustrating," says Miller. 
 "Still is," adds McDaniels. 
 NSA officials contacted their CIA counterparts early in 1993 and told them that three sections had been broken. What was the CIA's response? Were CIA employees also working on it? 
 The codebreakers never asked. They live in a don't-ask-questions culture, solving problems and remaining in the shadows. 
 "It just sat dormant and we walked away from it, as we do with any of our successes," Miller says matter-of-factly. 
 Last year, news accounts revealed that two others had unlocked most of the "Kryptos" mystery: CIA physicist David Stein, in February 1998, and Jim Gillogly, a California computer scientist, last June. They, too, failed to uncover the fourth section. 
 Though the NSA team was the first to decipher the three sections of "Kryptos," CIA spokesman Tom Crispell quickly points out that Stein completed his work with paper and pencil -- and without the benefit of a computer. Crispell was uncertain whether others at the agency are also working on "Kryptos." 
 Stein is "the only person I'm aware of," he says. "There was never a formal undertaking to solve this riddle." 
 Scheidt and Sanborn receive occasional letters and e-mail asking for clues and offering solutions -- some outlandish. One man in France is convinced that "Kryptos" has a biblical connotation and sees a serpent superimposed on the letters. Another would-be cryptographer argues that the embedded message refers to the War of 1812. 
 " Lots of harebrained schemes ," says Sanborn, who hopes that one day the entire message will be revealed. 
 "I'd love to have somebody do it entirely ," he says. "It's going to be tough." 
 While Stein could not be reached for comment, Gillogly remains hopeful that he will be able to solve the final section with his Pentium II computer. 
 A past president of the American Cryptogram Association, Gillogly has been hooked on secret messages since he was a child. He finds this one particularly troublesome. 
 "It's difficult because there's no hint about what kind of cipher this is," he says. 
 Meanwhile, McDaniels continues to flop on his couch with a pad and paper, when he's not playing volleyball or visiting his grandchildren. Miller also continues to "scratch at it." 
 Old habits die hard for cryptanalysts. 
 "You can lay it down," Miller says, "but you can't leave it alone." 
 
 2003-11-05 - Elonka 
 Here's the latest: 
 Monday: In the morning, I spent time going through the Sanborn files at the Smithsonian Archives of American Art, and then went upstairs in the same building to get copies of the Sanborn files at the Inventory of American Sculpture. 
 Monday lunch was with another art researcher at the Zola Restaurant. I got pictures of both the "Covert Operations Fragments" there, and took as many pictures and notes as I could of the "classified document wall" as I could until security started "harumph"-ing at me. We'll probably need another trip there though, since one of the walls in the restaurant has hardcopies of about 80 different intelligence-related documents in English, Russian, and French. At least one of those documents was the 1982 Sakharov source document for part 2 of the Cyrillic Projector, so my guess is that the source document for part 1 may be there as well. It's also worth noting that some of the documents seemed to be duplicates, which tells me that Sanborn probably used every single document that he had available to him for that wall, and made copies of existing documents when he ran out and needed to fill in a space. 
 Other interesting things at Zola included a slide projection of binary code on one wall, and a projection on the steps leading up to the restaurant that appeared to be the Kryptos cipheralphabet, but when I looked closer, it seemed to instead be a "regular" alphabet interspersed with the word Kryptos. 
 Monday afternoon I went to the Federal Reserve Board Art Gallery where I was personally greeted by the Art Director who then (somewhat grudgingly) personally escorted me to the building where Sanborn's piece was hanging, on the 7 th floor in the Board of Governors office, above a filing cabinet. I wasn't allowed to take closeup pictures of it, but I did get a couple images from about 10 feet away, and hand-transcribed all the cyrillic characters, which I then double-checked, and did a triple-check with a check-sum on each line. 
 Monday evening I visited Sanborn at his home in Georgetown. He and his girlfriend live in a nice house with beautiful wooden furniture, and the ceilings have been removed so you can look right up into the cedar beams of the roof area. It looks great, and there's a wonderful cedar smell throughout the home. 
 There's a patio/backyard, and then farther back past that there's a separate glass-walled building which is his studio. Sanborn showed me how he had tiny miniatures of his sculptures made. He sends an image to a company in California, which for something the size of Kryptos would produce a small flexible screen maybe 6 inches by 3 inches and includes all of the letters. You can then bend the screen into different shapes, or roll it into a cylinder with a penlight inside of it, so you could see how the letters were projected onto a wall. 
 Once he'd decided on what shape it should be in, he would send the order to the waterjet plant in Minneapolis (Gary, you were right) and they'd do the actual cutting. 
 Sanborn also went through an entire drawer of his filing cabinet, pulling out photographs of pieces that I didn't have yet. I offered to go through the files myself to save him time, but he declined. ;) I did keep a sharp eye out while he was going through the "Kryptos" folder, but didn't see anything that looked like a solution file! I did end up with several treasures though... 
 Lots of additional info for my "Sanborn" page, plus closeups of some other encrypted pieces, a couple other pictures of the Kryptos courtyard from different angles, and a small canister with a sample of the CIA pulped documents. After going through the files, I drove us (Sanborn, myself, and his girlfriend Jae) to a nearby sushi restaurant (supposedly one of the best ones in DC) and we talked about all kinds of stuff. Sanborn and I have had some common experiences such as extensive international travel through Asia, and we found an easy rapport on a wide variety of subjects. I could easily have seen us accidentally running into each other in some tiny third world cafe somewhere and having just as interesting conversations, as we did in the DC sushi restaurant. 
 ;) 
 After dinner, we went to his favorite hangout, a nearby coffeehouse called "Java Coffee" that he's been going to pretty much daily for 20 years. At the coffeeshop, I I pulled out my laptop computer and ran through the Kryptos presentation for him (you can see these slides at http://www.elonka.com/kryptos/ppt ), and we talked more about the sculpture and art and media and whatnot. Oh, and he said that the Abyssinian part of the Convention Center sculpture is actually modern Ethiopian. Evidently the waitresses at his favorite coffeeshop are Ethiopian, so they helped with the translation! 
 And now what you've all been waiting for... The Kryptos stuff! :) 
 Sanborn seemed somewhat unaware of just how big a deal Kryptos has become. 
 He was kind of bemused by how it's been over 10 years, and still has captured the public imagination. He commented how it was odd that "no one has recovered the original matrix". He kept using that word "matrix" quite a bit, such as to say " matrix system ". Evidently there's something important about re-creating the exact system that he used for encrypting the messages, and he has never seen anyone do that yet (and didn't see it anywhere on my slides). 
 When he saw my method for solving part 3, with the clean diagonals, he nodded and said that it must be "a by-product of the original matrix system ". 
 Similar to how Scheidt reacted, I saw Sanborn light up when I talked about how the extra "L" on the tableau side now means that we have the same number of characters on both the cipheralphabet and tableau sides. Neither Scheidt nor Sanborn said anything when I talked about that, but I definitely noticed both of them reacting, like sitting up or forward a little more, nodding like this was something that they knew and were glad that someone had noticed. 
 When I showed the pictures of the out of alignment letters, Sanborn made a point of pointing to them and specifically asking if anything else has been figured out about them. He said, " They're important." 
 When I asked about the misspellings and asked if they were accidental or deliberate, Sanborn said that they were deliberate, but it was less important what they were. He said, and I quote: "it's more the orientation of those letters that's useful there ." Later on in the evening he repeated that point, saying it was the " positioning " that was important. 
 Sanborn was adamant that Scheidt did not do the encryption. He said that Scheidt did teach him various systems "going back to Caesar", and that Sanborn used "several" of them, but that the actual encryption was done by Sanborn, by himself, during the time that he was driving the petrified tree from the southwestern U.S. back to the DC area. Sanborn said that he and Scheidt had agreed to keep it "compartmentalized" like that. Sanborn insisted that when it came to the encryption, he said (referring to himself) that it was "entirely me." 
 Sanborn said that no one else beta-tested the code -- not even Scheidt. 
 When I commented that first-time code creators often make errors that leave a code unsolvable, he said that he was certain that he did it right. He said though he has never gone back to decrypt it, because that keeps it more secure. In regards to the Cyrillic Projector, he said the errors there were probably the result of one of his assistants (I won't mention the person's name) doing a sloppy job. He mentioned how one of his assistants tried to encrypt something, and then when they discovered errors in the encryption, the assistant tried to go back to the source document and change the letters to match! He also said though that Scheidt had told him that misspellings could be good, since they made things harder to solve. 
 Getting back to Kryptos, Sanborn commented that he was surprised that no one had tried recovering the original matrix and running it through all possible "shifts". 
 When I showed him the number key for the column transposition, he nodded as though he already recognized it. Regarding the latitude/longitude coordinates, he said the USGS markerthat he used for a benchmark was at a point which corresponds with the marker that David Wilson found, about 400' northwest of the sculpture. 
 In terms of where the Kryptos lat/long coordinates point to, I showed him the spot that Chris/Xenon found, and Sanborn nodded and said that that looked "pretty close". But then he said it could be one of two locations. Either Xenon's spot, or at one other possible place, and he then pointed at a spot out in the front entrance area! The additional spot he pointed to was somewhere several yards south of where the compass rose is, but it didn't look like he was pointing at anything in particular. 
 After pointing out the two possible places that the lat/long could point to, he made the interesting comment, "Did you know that each night after we worked, the CIA employees would come out and use powerful neutron x-rays to examine everything we did, everything a contractor might have touched?" 
 Regarding the other front entrance pieces, he said he'd never been allowed to take pictures of those pieces himself, so he was very intrigued to see Gillogly's pictures. Sanborn also said that the front entrance pieces were supposed to parallel something in the courtyard, but then when I showed him the "bird's eye" pics, he saw that they didn't, which surprised him and he seemed a bit disappointed. 
 He said that the site of the Kryptos sculpture was chosen because there had been a tree and associated "tree grate" there, so there was already an 8-foot diameter hole which he could use for the pool. He also said that originally there had been a forest on that location, and that the Agency had to cut the trees down at night so that the Agency employees wouldn't get upset. 
 He said that Webster had definitely been one of the key individuals in getting the art there, because he wanted to give the Agency a "softer" image. 
 Sanborn had the impression that some of the other higher-ups at the Agency had tried to sabotage the project because of enmity with Webster. For example, an entire truckload of the granite that Sanborn had shipped in, just "disappeared" one day. Many thousands of pounds of granite (and the truck) just vanished without a trace and were never found. Sanborn said more granite had to be re-purchased for him. 
 He said he didn't design the entire Courtyard area -- just the pieces by the entrance, the green semicircular park area and the Kryptos sculpture. As an interesting aside, he said that when he put in the duck pond and filled it with water, within two hours there were ducks in it! 
 When I asked him about the source document for the first part of the Cyrillic Projector Code, he said something about the 1972 Senate Committee Hearings on the CIA, and the results of their studies. 
 I asked about the stairstep pattern at the top of the petrified tree, but he said that it didn't mean anything, that it was just, "that's the way it broke." 
 I specifically asked him if the question mark at the end of part 3 was part of section 3 or section 4, but he declined to answer. 
 He said he didn't know when the NSA had come up with their solution, but that he had never heard of anyone solving part 4. 
 I asked him if the "desparatly" typo was deliberate or accidental, and he declined to answer. 
 I brought up John Wilson's speculation about the 16 steps and "inserted candle", but he didn't react. 
 When I brought up how we'd been unable to find any book or poem that used the wording in the Part 1 sentence, he said that part 1 of Kryptos is an original sentence, written by him, with "carefully-chosen wording". 
 He said part 2 was deliberately written to sound like "an interrupted radio transmission", similar to the morse code messages. 
 He said that "Kryptos wasn't cracked the reverse of the way that I did it." 
 That's most of what I can remember. In terms of what my own speculations are at this point, I'm thinking of the wheels on a combination bicycle lock, and wondering if the shifted letters might mean that letters need to be shifted up or down in part 4. For example, dYAhR might mean that in each grouping of five letters (and many codes are written in groups of 5), that the 2nd 3rd and 5th letters need to be rotated/shifted up (or down) a notch. I'm also remembering that when I pointed out the trailing "KR" "YP" and "TOS" on the part 4 lines, that I got some kind of reaction, but I couldn't tell whether it was an "Ah, you noticed that", or "Heh, she's seeing things" smirk. But if we could "spin the wheels" of the bicycle lock to get the word "Kryptos" to line up 
 somehow . . . 
 Getting back to my itinerary: 
 Tuesday morning I visited the Hirshhorn to get a copy of the Sanborn files there, and then went over to the Convention Center to get additional images of the text on those sculptures. 
 Tuesday afternoon I spent many hours in the bowels of the GSA building. They have extensive files on four Sanborn pieces, including the Kryptos sculpture, since they're the office that commissioned it. I'd originally been planning to get a copy of everything they had, but it was just too much information. 
 The Kryptos file alone was maybe 4 inches thick, along with dozens of slide images and articles. So I went through and copied anything that I didn't have that looked like it might be remotely applicable, such as correspondence from Sanborn. Much of it was unrelated bureaucraticness, such as correspondence with each of the members of the selection committee, lots of legalese in the contracts, etc. A couple gems in the pile though were pictures of what the site looked like before and during construction, along with a couple photos of Kryptos from angles we haven't seen before, copies of a couple articles which I hadn't yet seen, and a copy of the "maintenance" manual that Sanborn wrote for the CIA staff in terms of the upkeep of the sculpture. I look forward to getting all of this uploaded once I'm back in St. Louis! 
 Today, Wednesday, morning, I started off by driving to Baltimore to see Sanborn's work there. I searched for but did not find Sanborn's Patapsco River Delta piece, but did successfully locate the "Cold Spring Street Station" sculpture. Then I headed to Bethesda to get more pictures and compass readings of the Artery Plaza pieces, and headed next to Greenbelt for detailed photos of the Indian Run Park cylinder. 
 Wednesday evening there was a tornado warning for Maryland, so I decided to pull over in a parking lot near the interstate and wait out the storm, which is/was also convenient because it gave me a chance to catch up on my writing! 
 Much of this was written in my car, as I balanced my laptop against the steering wheel. ;) 
 I'll have more information, pictures, and whatnot later... But I wanted to at least pass the above bits along to the group. Considerable food for thought! 
 Signing off for now, 
 Agent Elonka :) 
 
 2003-11-11 - Atomic Time 
 Interviewer: Could you describe the process of working on Kryptos (1988-1990), the curved copper screen for the CIA inner courtyard and entrance, which you designed with plants, trees, pools of water, petrified trees, and lodestones. 
 Sanborn: I have to preface this by saying that I was born in Washington, D.C., and I am very familiar with government agencies.  In my first walk-through at the CIA I was stunned.  They had built a new building, and it was still painted institutional green on the inside. I was very surprised that this building, which was supposed to be state of the art in 1990, still had a lot of the old governmental vestiges.  The hallways were warrenlike for obvious security reasons.  The windows were partially blocked, and a large part of it was underground.  I decided to do the commission because I felt as if I might be able to make some sort of difference, in that I could work from the inside and some how affect the thinking of the CIA.  As naive as it seems, I attempted to do that.  What I chose for the piece was to deal with the science of cryptography.  Cryptography began in mathematics.  Codes were developed, even from Caesar's time, based on number theory and mathematical principles.  I decided to use those principles and designed a work that is encoded. I wrote a fairly extensive text, then encoded it into a matrix system, which seemed to me, as an artist, to be fairly simple.  I figured it would take the agency a year or two to decode, when, in fact, it took them almost eight years to get part of it.  To date, they haven't cracked the other part. It ended up being something of a challenge for them to do.  Physically the piece sits in the absolute center of the agency, in a courtyard, and perhaps it taunts them every day to think about something other than the document they are working on at any given time. 
 Interviewer: Since then, you must feel that merging politics with art is another way of communicating with the world. 
 Sanborn: I adapted fairly quickly to that and discovered an underlying political motivation that I didn't know existed before that time.  What affected me most profoundly was the realization that the sciences of cryptography and mathematics are very elegant pure sciences.  I found that the ends for which these pure sciences are used are less elegant. 
 Interviewer: Would you say that the CIA project and the experience associated with it led to your understanding that what is elegant, on the one hand, may not necessarily be so elegant from another point of view?  Did the opposition of surface and content, of aesthetic surface hiding disturbing content, lead to other socially concerned projects during the 1990s? 
 Sanborn:  Yes.  Within a year of doing the CIA commission, I did an exhibition at the Corcoran Gallery, in 1992, called "Covert Obsolescence", which consisted of "The Code Room" and "The Listening Post".  From the titles you can see I was dealing with espionage in light of the Cold War.  I saw the work of the agency as still reflecting a Cold War mentality, where the KGB versus the CIA was the big topic.  But from about 1990 to today the topic has shifted tremendously  So now it's the CIA and Moussad versus Islamic radicals, et cetera.  The Corcoran installation had some references to Greek mythology.  There was a freestanding cylinder in the center of the room that was totally perforated with encoded text.  Half of the cylinder was perforated text dealing with CIA operations.  The other half of the cylinder dealt with KGB operations.  The two existed side by side.  A pinpoint light inside the cylinder projected these encoded texts, including the word Medusa, which was embedded in the texts, over the inside of the gallery, so that they covered every inch of its surface.  It created an effect where the Medusa's gaze, represented by these bright texts, fell over one's body as one walked through the room.  There was a petrified tree in the room, a tree that had turned into stone.  I felt as if the projected light was a visible ray that was as toxic as the information on that cylinder.  It was a transformation from a text written to a text projected to a text that became toxic when it touched your body. 
 Interviewer:  Where did these texts come from? 
 Sanborn: The text I chose was directly obtained from KGB and CIA documents that I had obtained from the Library of Congress and from a former KGB operative.  One room was the projected text; the other room was the listening post.  In the basements of embassies throughout the world and in Washington there are rooms that are covered with copper screen, and they are used for encoding and decoding incoming and outgoing messages.  The code room that I used in the Corcoran intallation was made entirely of pulped CIA documents that I obtained from the agency.  Until 1991, the agency produced tons of these documents every day.  They were destroyed at the end of each day and were taken from the agency in a pulped form.  I made a deal with the director of Central Intelligence in which I gained access to this pulped material in exchange for offering part of the code of my CIA sculpture. 
 2004-09-17: Post of dinner with Ed 
 I had dinner with Ed last night and he gave a little talk about crypto, etc. However, during his speech, he said the following (not verbatim, I'm going from memory): 1. When discussing the topic of Steganography, he said "I used a bit of stego when designing the fourth part of Kryptos." 2. When further discussing the creation of Kryptos, he said, "In the first 3 parts, I gave anyone attempting to break the code the advantage of the English language with all its known patters, but I removed that advantage in the fourth part." 
 https://kryptos.groups.io/g/main/topic/34657216#msg1717 
 
 2005-01-20 - Wired 
 Questions for Kryptos' Creator 
 Sleuths seeking to solve the Kryptos puzzle often scour interviews with artist Jim Sanborn for clues about the cryptic sculpture, which is located at the headquarters of the Central Intelligence Agency. Below is a partial transcript of the Wired News interview with Sanborn conducted for a story on Kryptos. The interview has been edited for […] 
 SLEUTHS SEEKING TO solve the Kryptos puzzle often scour interviews with artist Jim Sanborn for clues about the cryptic sculpture, which is located at the headquarters of the Central Intelligence Agency. Below is a partial transcript of the Wired News interview with Sanborn conducted for a story on Kryptos . The interview has been edited for length and organization. 
 **Wired News:  ** Before creating the CIA sculpture, you never built something that involved cryptographic code. But since the CIA sculpture you've built a number of pieces that involve code. Are you changing your focus? 
 Jim Sanborn:  The fact that my earlier work didn't include cryptography doesn't mean it excluded things dealing with secrecy. The work that happened before the CIA, and (was) the reason I was chosen (to do the CIA piece), dealt with invisible forces -- albeit natural invisible forces. I built pieces about the Coriolis force * *that makes whirlpools in the Northern and Southern hemispheres turn in opposite directions. I also worked with the Earth's magnetic field and worked with lodestones ... from which we derived our knowledge of electricity. It was all involved in the secrets of nature before the agency chose my work to deal with the secrecy of man. 
 **WN : * Is it important to look at your other works, before and after Kryptos, to understand Kryptos? 
 Sanborn:  For the student of cryptography it's always helpful to gather as much information as possible when zeroing in on and encoding a system. 
 **WN : **A number of your works post-*Kryptos incorporate elements that are in Kryptos, for example, the Cyrillic Projector **(which has been solved) and a work that has sometimes been called the Untitled Kryptos Piece. Do these sculptures contain specific clues to help solve Kryptos? Or can you solve it without dealing with those at all? 
 Sanborn: Well, I'm not going to answer that question. (Laughs) 
 **WN : **You also have two other sculptures on the CIA grounds that are near the *Kryptos *sculpture. Are they related to * Kryptos in some way? 
 Sanborn: Well, all I'll say is basically I designed the piece(s) to act (such that) this part is easy, the next part is less easy, the next part is the most difficult. So if you consider the entrance to the new CIA building (to be) the entrance to the agency, the piece that's out front is the most simplistic, basic code that there is. Then they get more sophisticated the further you (go onto the campus). 
 **WN : **Do the other pieces in the courtyard have clues for solving *Kryptos? Sanborn: I won't say. **WN : **Do you have to be on the CIA grounds in order to solve *Kryptos? Sanborn: No. 
 WN :  *So just by reading the text taken from * Kryptos and posted online , you can solve the puzzle? 
 Sanborn: Well, yeah. That doesn't mean that what I've said in the piece doesn't do something physically there at the agency. So the effect of the piece might affect something at the agency so that you'd have to see what I did at the agency. 
 **WN : * What do you mean? 
 Sanborn: In part of the code that's been deciphered, I refer to an act that took place when I was at the agency and a location that's on the grounds of the agency. So ... you have to decipher the piece and then go to the agency and find that place. There are, for example, longitude and latitude coordinates on the piece, which refer to locations of the agency. 
 **WN : * When you say act do you mean an act that you did or that happened while you were there? 
 Sanborn: An act that I could have carried out. I refer to something I'd done out there. 
 **WN : **Something that you *did do? 
 Sanborn: I made reference in the encoded text to something I could have done there. 
 **WN : **How many (cryptographic) techniques did you use (in *Kryptos)? Sanborn: I would think five or six. 
 **WN : * Are the coded systems you used the same systems that (CIA cryptographer) Ed Scheidt gave you or have they been altered? 
 Sanborn: Mr. Scheidt basically gave me an outline of historic and contemporary ... encoding systems that have been formally used by the agency and were still used by the agency and other people (in 1990). He gave me a whole variety of possible systems to use and ways to modify all of those systems. But as a visual artist, I like to rely on systems that include visual (material) as well as digital material that can be deciphered by machines. It's also well-known that I did use some matrix codes Ed gave me, and I have also designed visual systems for encoding, which are much harder for cryptographers to crack because they're individualistic. 
 **WN : **But it's still basically code systems that Scheidt gave you, right? I mean he could decipher * Kryptos if he wanted to, correct? 
 Sanborn: No, he doesn't know the solution. I made that very clear that I didn't want him to be able to decipher what's going on ... that I'd be modifying systems and developing my own, which would make it virtually impossible for him to decipher all of it. I intended the 80 percent (of the text) that's been deciphered to be deciphered and to be deciphered in stages and relatively quickly. The final part is obviously the, you know, the apex of the pyramid there. 
 **WN : **The *Cyrillic Projector, *when decrypted, turned out to be text from a classified KGB document instructing agents on how to gather and work with sources. The projector essentially dealt with covert obsolescence, that is, covert activities that became obsolete with the end of the Cold War. Does *Kryptos also deal with covert obsolescence? 
 Sanborn: No. Not that it doesn't say something about clandestine trade craft. A lot of the work (I do) deals with secrecy and ... the modus operandi of spies -- how they operate, how they turn sources and things like that. Even the (other) pieces at the agency that are in the courtyard -- stone layers that have encoded text on them -- sort of dealt with secrecy as an entity, which has existed through time for eons and generations. Cave people (for example) keeping secret their methods of killing a mammoth or something like that. 
 **WN : **If *Kryptos *is solved, will the answer be something like the *Cyrillic Projector's solution -- text from a formerly classified document -- or will it have a larger meaning? 
 Sanborn: :  It's a very different animal (from the Cyrillic Projector ). The answer will be far more ambiguous. Of the part that's been decoded already there is certain ambiguity in the last few sentences and it's been open to interpretation, as has the whole piece. 
 **WN : **The *Cyrillic Projector has some of the same code that's on the CIA piece, but it does have some alterations. It's not completely identical. Why is that? 
 Sanborn: If you make a body of work over many years so that anyone will know that it's your art, you have a common denominator, which means you leave clues. You don't just sign every artwork. There's something about that particular artwork that you say, "Oh, that's a Sanborn." And (the coding) was one of the common denominators that I chose to leave in. Just like my lodestones. I brought my lodestones forward 10 years and used them at the agency. Then I brought *Kryptos *forward five years and used them after that. And I will continue to bring work back and carry ideas forward in order to get a continuum for the body of work. 
 **WN : * Is there anything planted on the CIA property that you've buried? Sanborn: Oh, I won't say. 
 **WN : * Well, you've mentioned before that each night after construction would finish for the day people from the CIA would come out to measure the materials. 
 Sanborn: Well the new (CIA) building was being built while I was there and at night there were teams that used, I believe, a neutron scan (on) everything that went into the agency so that they could find any bugs or anything that had been planted. (They) used ground-penetrating radar and various other means to see and find everything that was there. And I would suppose they did that with my piece as well, which makes it difficult to do whatever you'd like to do -- not in an espionage way, but whatever you want to do. 
 **WN : * What do you mean? Were there things that you wanted to do with the sculpture that you were unable to do? 
 Sanborn: I didn't say I was unable to do it, I just said it makes things difficult. When somebody comes in and X-rays everything you do every night, it makes it tough doesn't it? (Laughs) 
 **WN : * So you did something, but they knew about it? Sanborn: :  No, I didn't say that, either. 
 **WN : * There is someone who says he thinks he knows how the last section should be decrypted. John Wilson says that section three from Howard Carter's diary is giving instructions to the reader for what they should do with the text in the last section in order to decipher it. For example, when it describes Carter putting the candle through the hole, Wilson says it's an instruction for what to do with the text. So Wilson placed the word candle into the text. Is he on to something or off track? 
 Sanborn: I'm inclined to not comment. If a person deciphers and sends me the exact decipherment -- if it can be deciphered exactly, considering most of my things are rife with mistakes on purpose -- I'd probably let them know that they got it if they did. I will say that I have left instructions in the earlier text that refer to later text. (But) that's as far as I'll go. 
 **WN : **Do you want the puzzle of *Kryptos to be solved? 
 Sanborn: Uhhh ... I certainly want it to be considered. I had figured that the parts that have been solved already would have been done a lot quicker than they were. But that might just have been a question of focus of the cryptography community. 
 **WN : * One decoded section refers to a "WW." It says specifically, "Who knows the exact location? Only WW." Who is WW? 
 Sanborn: (Former CIA Director) William Webster. 
 **WN : * The CIA required you to write down the solution to the sculpture and give it to Webster. Webster has said that he forgot the solution. Did he ever actually know the answer? 
 Sanborn: Well, you know, I wasn't completely truthful with the man. And I'm sure he realizes that. I mean that's part of tradecraft, isn't it? Deception is everywhere. I had to leave an envelope at the agency saying what was on the (sculpture). I gave it to William Webster at the dedication ceremony with a wax seal on it, but in fact I really didn't tell him the whole story. I definitely didn't give him the last section, which has never been deciphered. 
 **WN : * But he thinks you did give him the solution. Sanborn: That's his problem! (laughs) **WN : **Do *you remember what the solution is? Sanborn: No. **WN : * You don't remember the solution to your own sculpture? 
 Sanborn: No. I've got it hidden someplace but I'm not going to read it. I have done everything I can to forget (it). Because I don't want to slip and give somebody information about it. I mean, you read the piece of paper, you burn it, and you forget it. That's the only way information is kept secret. (Otherwise) it's very difficult not to give clues. In the early days, anything I said was a clue. Now things are getting more and more refined the more people (are looking into) this. They are looking for shreds, tiny little slivers of information. So I have to be very careful not to go any further. 
 **WN : * So if you don't know the answer how will you know if anyone has solved it? 
 Sanborn: I have the solution hidden someplace. So if somebody cracks it I can cross-check it. 
 **WN : * What if something happens to you? Sanborn: The secret will probably pass away. **WN : * You haven't left it in your will? 
 Sanborn: :  Well, actually I have. I think it's important that whoever says that they cracked it will in fact find out whether they actually did. So from that standpoint, there does have to be some sort of historic record of what it says. 
 2005-01-21 - Wired 
 Solving the Enigma of Kryptos 
 is renewing interest in a cryptographic sculpture at CIA headquarters. Only three people are said to know the puzzle's solution. But the sculptor now says that two of those people only think they know the answer. By Kim Zetter. 
 WHAT DOES ITsay about the Central Intelligence Agency that its agents can crack the secret codes of enemy nations but can't unravel a coded sculpture sitting outside their cafeteria window? 
 It says, perhaps, that artist Jim Sanborn, who created the cryptographic sculpture named Kryptos **that sits on CIA grounds, could have a career in covert operations if he ever grows tired of stumping the experts. 
 It's been nearly 15 years since Sanborn installed the 12-foot-high, verdigrised copper, granite and wood sculpture inscribed with four encrypted messages * *at the CIA's Langley, Virginia, headquarters in 1990. And it's been seven years since anyone made progress at cracking its code. 
 But publication of the novel The Da Vinci Code **has renewed interest in solving the puzzle because author Dan Brown made two veiled references to Kryptos on his book's dust jacket. Brown's publisher sponsored a contest around the references, and Brown has hinted that his next book, which takes place in Washington, D.C., may feature the sculpture in some way. 
 This is good news to Elonka Dunin, an executive producer and manager at Missouri gaming company Simutronics , who is obsessed with *cracking * * Kryptos *and thinks that the more people who work on the puzzle the quicker they'll solve it. 
 "We have lots of different theories that we're chasing down," Dunin said of her band of sleuths, which includes some CIA employees. "But there's no way we'll know whether we're on the right track until something comes loose." 
 *Kryptos *isn't a complete mystery. Parts of it have been solved. 
 In 1998, CIA analyst David Stein cracked three of the four coded messages after diddling over the problem with paper and pencil for about 400 hours spread over many lunch breaks. Only his CIA colleagues initially knew of his success, since the agency didn't publicize it. A year later, California computer scientist Jim Gillogly gained public notoriety when he cracked the same three messages using a Pentium II. 
 But for 15 years, the last *Kryptos *section has remained unsolved. And when experts or amateurs do decipher it, they'll know what it says but not necessarily what it means. Sculptor Sanborn said the text is a riddle, which requires sleuths to be on the CIA grounds to solve it. 
 "In part of the code that's been deciphered, I refer to an act that took place when I was at the agency and a location that's on the ground of the agency," Sanborn told Wired News. "So in order to find that place, you have to decipher the piece and then go to the agency and find that place." 
 Sanborn may be referring to something he buried on the CIA grounds, though he's not saying. The decrypted text mentions a burial and gives latitude and longitude coordinates (38 57 6.5 N, 77 8 44 W), which Sanborn said referred to "locations of the agency." The coordinates, slightly altered, appear on the Da Vinci Code book jacket. Brown made the first number 37 instead of 38; he's said that he may reveal the reason in future books. Some sleuths have determined that the coordinates on the sculpture mark a spot on the CIA grounds about 150 feet from the sculpture. Others have placed it elsewhere, however. 
 The sculpture's theme is intelligence gathering ( Kryptos is Greek for "hidden"). It features a large block of petrified wood standing upright, with a tall copper plate scrolling out of the wood like a sheet of paper. At the sculpture's base is a round pool with fountain pump that sends water in a circular motion around the pool. 
 Some 1,800 letters are carved out of the copper plate, with some of them forming a table based on an encryption method * *developed in the 16th century by a Frenchman named Blaise de Vigenere. The table helped Stein and Gillogly decipher portions of the encrypted messages. 
 The encrypted sections include spelling errors, which Sanborn said were intentional, possibly to throw off sleuths, and misaligned characters set higher on a line of text than characters around them. 
 The first section is a poetic phrase, which Sanborn composed himself. The second hints at something buried: "Does Langley know about this? They should: It's buried out there somewhere." The third section comes from archaeologist Howard Carter's diary describing the opening of a door in King Tut's tomb on Nov. 26, 1922 . 
 Scores of professional and amateur cryptographers have tried their hand at decrypting the last passage, which consists of fewer than 100 characters. Cryptographers at the National Security Agency have also taken a stab at it, to no avail. Sleuths scrutinize every Sanborn interview for clues. But he's careful to remain oblique. 
 "In the early days, anything I said was a clue," Sanborn said. "Now things are getting more and more refined the more people (are looking into) this. They are looking for shreds, tiny little slivers of information. So I have to be very careful not to go any further." (To aid sleuths, we've published an edited transcript of our interview with Sanborn.) 
 Decoders have turned to Sanborn's other sculptures for clues. After Kryptos , Sanborn created other coded sculptures, such as The Cyrillic Projector , a cylindrical sculpture that sits at the University of North Carolina in Charlotte, which was solved * *about a year ago, and a work that is sometimes called the *Untitled Kryptos *piece, which reproduces the same text from Kryptos . It took a few months to crack the Projector , which was written in Cyrillic letters. Deciphering it required decoding the Cyrillic, then translating the message into English. It turned out to be text from classified KGB documents. 
 Sleuths have also looked at works Sanborn created around *Kryptos *on the CIA grounds. These include slabs of stone with a compass and Morse code on them. 
 Although photos of the works are available, physical access is restricted. In 2002, Dunin was one of the lucky few who saw the works in person. 
 Dunin visited Langley to give a presentation to analysts about steganography and al-Qaida. Although she wasn't allowed to snap photos of *Kryptos while there, her CIA guides arranged to have an official photographer take pictures of her standing next to it. She also made rubbings *of the text. 
 Until now, only three people were said to know the solution to Kryptos . Sanborn, a CIA cryptographer named Ed Scheidt who helped him choose and alter the coding techniques for the sculpture, and former CIA director William Webster, who received a sealed envelope containing the solution, which sits in a CIA archive until the time when someone solves the puzzle. 
 But Sanborn told Wired News that Scheidt, now a retired chairman of the CIA's Cryptographic Center, and Webster only think they know the solution. 
 The CIA required Sanborn to write the solution down and present it to Webster so the agency wouldn't be embarrassed if the sculpture turned out to contain a message that was pornographic or critical of the agency. Sanborn gave officials an envelope with a wax seal. But Sanborn said he didn't give Webster the whole story. 
 "Well, you know, I wasn't completely truthful with the man," Sanborn said, laughing. "And I'm sure he realizes that. I mean that's part of trade craft, isn't it? Deception is everywhere.... I definitely didn't give him the last section, which has never been deciphered." 
 Scheidt, at the CIA's request, worked with Sanborn to choose the coding processes he used with the sculpture. But Sanborn did the encryption on his own. Scheidt was surprised to learn that he might not know the puzzle's solution. "I haven't heard him say that before," Scheidt said. "It's possible I guess. 
 "I know what the message *was *to be. (But) since he's the one who had the chisel in his hands, there could be some changes." 
 Sanborn said he didn't expect that the code would remain unsolved for this long. 
 Dunin said she doesn't care if she's not the one who solves the puzzle as long as it's taken "off my plate." She doesn't expect it will be a letdown when the code is cracked. 
 "When we solved the *Cyrillic Projector *it was exciting and energizing for everyone working on Kryptos ," she said. "If we solve Kryptos , there are plenty of *other codes *to solve after that." 
 
 2005-01-21 - Wired 
 Inside Info on Kryptos' Codes 
 Ed Scheidt is former director of the Central Intelligence Agency's Cryptographic Center. Scheidt, who helped artist Jim Sanborn choose cryptographic techniques for his Kryptos sculpture, now works for TecSec, a Virginia company that does cryptographic work for the Department of Defense and other clients. This interview for the Wired News story on Kryptos was edited […] 
 ED SCHEIDT IS former director of the Central Intelligence Agency's Cryptographic Center. Scheidt, who helped artist Jim Sanborn choose cryptographic techniques for his *Kryptos *sculpture, now works for TecSec, a Virginia company that does cryptographic work for the Department of Defense and other clients. This interview for the Wired News story on *Kryptos *was edited for length and organization. 
 **Wired News : **How did you help Jim Sanborn with *Kryptos? 
 Ed Scheidt :  I provided the cryptographic process as well as worked with him with what he was looking to do as far as the story (the sculpture would tell). We came up with a methodology using some of the known cryptographic solutions (at the time). 
 **WN : * How many cryptographic processes are used on the sculpture? 
 Scheidt: There are four different processes. Two of them are similar and the other two are different things. The first three processes were designed so that a person could, through cryptographic analysis, have access to the English language (on the sculpture). And the last process, I masked the English language so it's more of a challenge now. It's progressively harder in the challenges. 
 **WN : * What do you mean the first three were designed so that a person could have access to the English? 
 Scheidt: All four (sections) are done in the English language. The message could have been in another language. (But) this particular puzzle is in the English language.... The techniques of the first three parts, which some people have broken, (used) frequency counting and other techniques that are similar to that. You can get insight into the sculpture through that technique because the English language is still visible through the code. (But with) this other technique (in the fourth part), I disguise that. So ... you need to solve the technique first and then go for the puzzle. 
 **WN : * Are all four of the processes known processes? There aren't any that aren't known, right? 
 Scheidt: The masking technique may not be known. **WN : * What do you mean? 
 Scheidt: That's part of the puzzle I told (Jim) I would keep secret. 
 **WN : * How difficult is it to solve that technique? 
 Scheidt: Well, (the sculpture) has been around (unsolved) about 15 years. 
 **WN : JIM said that he took your techniques and then he deliberately masked them even more so that even you wouldn't know what was in the puzzle. 
 Scheidt: Ah hah. I can't respond to that one. I haven't heard him say that before. It's possible I guess. I haven't talked to Jim on what he did, but I do know ... there was some masking techniques that were used and that's about it. 
 **WN : * So let's say you might not know exactly how to decipher the coded text, but do you know the message that the text says once it's decoded? The riddle within the text? 
 Scheidt: The solution to the text once it's decoded (you mean). The last (section), I don't know what Jim did, and I obviously haven’t gone back to see if there were changes and things like that. I know what we talked about. 
 **WN : * You never went back to the puzzle to see if he actually did what you discussed and to see if you could solve it? 
 Scheidt: No. **WN : * So you may not know what the message says. 
 Scheidt: Obviously there could be a possibility. I know what the message *was *to be. (But) since he's the one who had the chisel in his hands, there could be some changes. 
 **WN : * Is there anything buried at the site? Scheidt: I'm not aware of anything being buried, no. 
 **WN : * But within the text that's already been translated it does mention something being buried on the grounds of the CIA. 
 Scheidt: Well, the idea of encoding a message is not only to encode the externals of a message (the English language), but the message itself. Once it is readable, it may have other encoding that's involved in it. That's something that would show up in secret messages. If I wanted to, for instance, say (that) you and I are going to meet at 1 o'clock on Friday. We may establish a code that 1 o'clock on Friday is equal to "cake." So in my message I would say how about you and I meeting at a convenient place for cake? Then you and I really know that *cake *means the time. 
 **WN : * So someone could translate the actual message but not know what the message means. 
 Scheidt: That's right. And that's where the masking and all these other kinds of techniques can come into play. 
 **WN : * Do you know of anyone at the agency who is currently trying to solve it? 
 Scheidt: I haven't talked to anyone there about it. I would have to believe somebody would, at lunchtime, want to take a look at it. I think there are 98 characters left. That's not a lot of characters. It's a question of how would you approach it? Would you approach it mathematically? Would you approach it in the context of secret writings or symbols? There's a whole array of things which offer a challenge. 
 **WN : **When the *Cyrillic Projector *was decrypted it referred to KGB documents. I kind of hope that *Kryptos will have a larger meaning than point to a physical document. 
 Scheidt: I can only say the intent was to have a larger meaning. **WN : * What do you mean by larger meaning? 
 Scheidt: Well, if I can remember right, intelligence gathering was one of the meanings that was wanted to be portrayed. Now intelligence gathering can take on a lot of meanings in its own self. It could mean the techniques of intelligence gathering. It could mean the process of intelligence gathering. It could be the result of intelligence gathering. It could take on a larger role. My understanding from a while back was that was the intent. 
 **WN : **But all of those things are limited to the realm of intelligence gathering. And what I'm hoping is that *Kryptos translates into some kind of philosophical truth. 
 Scheidt: Knowing Jim, he would think along those lines. And just seeing it in some of his other work I think he would want to portray things of that nature. Philosophical things. 
 **WN : * Right. Some of his work before the coding pieces was related to nature's secrets. 
 Scheidt: That's right. So I would have to believe that would come out in his work in time. Another way of saying it is that as one peels the onion away, or the various cloaks, you come closer to the truth from a philosophical sense. And then where does it take you down that path? Well I would assume that the path will lead you down different ways, depending on your philosophical perspective. So it's again back to is it a black-and-white answer or is it an answer that has a lot of gray areas? 
 **WN : * I assume that by the sculpture's very nature it would have to have a lot of gray areas, like life itself. No black-and-white answers. 
 Scheidt: There you go. See? Philosophical. **WN : * So you're telling me that I won't be disappointed. 
 Scheidt: :  I don't think (you will be). Just knowing Jim. In talking to Jim, he has philosophies that he would like to portray and this is a medium for him to do that. And also this is a project that has a lot of depth to it. It would give an artist a good opportunity to do a lot of things as opposed to be narrow in their approach. 
 
 2005-05-27 Wall Street Journal 
 CIA sculpture 'kryptos' draws mystery lovers 
 Friday, May 27, 2005 By John D. McKinnon, The Wall Street Journal 
 LANGLEY, Va. -- The big mystery at the Central Intelligence Agency, sitting in a sunny corner of the headquarters courtyard, begins this way: "EMUFPHZLRFAXYUSDJKZLDKRNSHGNFIVJ." 
 That's the first line of the Kryptos sculpture, a 10-foot-tall, S-shaped copper scroll perforated with 3-inch-high letters spelling out words in code. Completed 15 years ago, Kryptos, which is Greek for "hidden," at first attracted interest mainly from government code breakers who quietly deciphered the easier parts without announcing their findings publicly. 
 Now, many mystery lovers around the world have joined members of the national-security establishment in trying to crack the rest. So far, neither amateurs nor pros have been able to do it. 
 The latest scramble was set off by "The Da Vinci Code," the thriller about a modern-day search for the Holy Grail. On the book's dust jacket, author Dan Brown placed clues that hint at Kryptos's significance. The main one is a set of geographic coordinates that roughly locate the sculpture. (One of the coordinates is off slightly, for reasons that Mr. Brown so far has kept secret.) A game at www.thedavincicode.com suggests that Kryptos is a clue to the subject of Mr. Brown's as-yet-unpublished next novel, "The Solomon Key." 
 Gary Phillips, 27 years old, a Michigan computer programmer, started researching Kryptos last year, hours after learning about its Da Vinci Code connection. "Once it pulls you in, you just can't stop thinking about it," he says. Eventually, Mr. Phillips says, he let a struggling software business go under and took a construction job so he would have more time for solving Kryptos. 
 The quest to solve the fourth and final passage of Kryptos's message has spawned several Web sites -- including Mr. Phillips's -- as well as an online discussion group that has more than 500 members. The discussion group was founded by Gary Warzin, who heads Audiophile Systems Ltd. in Indianapolis. He became fascinated with Kryptos after visiting the CIA in 2001. But after months of trying to crack the code on his own, Mr. Warzin -- whose other hobbies include escaping from straitjackets -- decided he needed help. 
 Kryptos devotees are intrigued by the three passages that have been deciphered so far. They appear to offer clues to solving the sculpture's fourth passage, and possibly to locating something buried. 
 Sculptor James Sanborn, Kryptos's creator, says he wrote or adapted all three. The first reads, "Between subtle shading and the absence of light lies the nuance of iqlusion." Jim Gillogly, a California computer researcher believed to be the first person outside the intelligence world to solve the first three parts, came up with the translation, which includes the deliberate misspelling of the word illusion. 
 The second passage, more suggestive, reads in part, "It was totally invisible. How's that possible? They used the Earth's magnetic field. The information was gathered and transmitted undergruund to an unknown location. Does Langley know about this? They should: it's buried out there somewhere." That passage is followed by geographic coordinates that suggest a location elsewhere on the CIA campus. 
 The third decoded passage is based on a diary entry by archaeologist Howard Carter, on the day in 1922 when he discovered the tomb of the ancient Egyptian King Tutankhamen. It reads in part, "With trembling hands I made a tiny breach in the upper left-hand corner. And then, widening the hole a little, I inserted the candle and peered in. The hot air escaping from the chamber caused the flame to flicker, but presently details of the room within emerged from the mist. Can you see anything?" Mr. Sanborn confirms that the translations are accurate. 
 In addition to deliberate misspellings, there are letters slightly higher than others on the same line. Other possible clues are contained in smaller parts of the work scattered around the CIA grounds. Made of red granite and sheets of copper, these are tattooed with Morse code that spells out phrases like "virtually invisible" and "t is your position." In addition, a compass needle carved onto one of the rocks is pulled off due north by a lodestone that Mr. Sanborn placed nearby. 
 Those poring over the puzzle these days are thought to include national-security workers as well as retirees, computer-game players and cryptogram fans. Some devotees believe Kryptos holds profound significance as a portal into the wisdom of the ancients. 
 More typical is Jennifer Bennett, a 27-year-old puzzle aficionado who works as a poker-room supervisor near Seattle. She came across the Kryptos mystery last year while on maternity leave, as she searched for online games to play. Now back at work, she still spends an hour a day on Kryptos after her children have gone to bed. Like most would-be code breakers, she relies on pencil and paper. 
 Others, like Mr. Gillogly, the California code breaker, are partial to computers. Semiretired, he spent 30 years at the Rand Corp., then had his own software business. He estimates that his computers have tried at least 100 billion possible solutions to the fourth passage over the years. His main computer these days, he says, is a 1.7 GHz laptop with a Pentium 4 processor. 
 Experts say the fourth passage -- known to insiders as "K4" -- is written in a more complex and difficult code than the first three, one designed to mask patterns of recurring letters that code breakers look for. 
 Efforts at finding a solution have grown increasingly elaborate. Elonka Dunin, an executive at St. Louis computer-game company Simutronics, has hunted down other encoded sculptures by Mr. Sanborn in search of recurring themes. Some, like researcher Chris Hanson, who runs a company that makes software for constructing 3D landscape models, have mapped the CIA's headquarters or built virtual replicas of Kryptos. 
 Mr. Sanborn has grown uncomfortable with some of the attention his work is getting, particularly from those who see religious overtones. " I don't want my work manipulated in such a way that its meaning is somehow transformed, " the Kryptos sculptor says. He dismisses any religious connotations or allusions to beliefs of the ancients. 
 A spokeswoman for Dan Brown referred questions to Doubleday, his publisher, explaining that he's at work on his new novel and "incommunicado." A spokesman for Doubleday declined to comment. 
 Mr. Sanborn, who lives and works in Washington, burnished his reputation with Kryptos. He has exhibited around the world, including at the Hirshhorn Museum and Corcoran Gallery of Art. His more recent work has focused on the early development of atomic weapons, employing actual equipment from the Los Alamos National Laboratory. 
 He had no formal training in cryptography when he created Kryptos, but worked with a retired CIA official, Ed Scheidt, who was starting up an encryption-software business, TecSec Inc. Mr. Sanborn says he withheld the full solution to the puzzle from Mr. Scheidt, as well as from the CIA itself. An agency spokesman says he isn't aware of anyone having solved the fourth passage. 
 Despite the struggles of would-be code breakers, Mr. Sanborn insists the puzzle can be solved, and teases them by saying that one clue overlooked so far is sitting in plain view. "The most obvious key to the sculpture, nobody has picked up on." 
 
 2005-06-09 - NPR 
 06/09/2005 NPR’s All Things Considered CIA Experts Still Spooked by Kryptos Puzzle Time: (5:06) URL:: http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=4684720 RM: Renee Montagene MLK: Mary Louise Kelley JS: James Sanborn JG: Jim Gillogly ES: Ed Scheidt GW: Gary Warzin Transcribed By: Jew-Lee Irena Lann 
 RM: For fifteen years, a sculpture in the courtyard of the Central Intelligence Agency has taunted amateur and professional code-breakers alike. Kryptos, is a curved copper wall. It features about two thousand characters divided into four coded passages. Cryptographers have cracked the first three, but it's been six years since anyone reported further progress, and sculptor Jim Sanborn believes he's the only man alive, who knows the full code. NPR's Mary Louise Kelley has the story. 
 MLK: Jim Sanborn is the first to admit he's an unlikely person to have devised a code that for fifteen years has stumped even the pros. at the CIA and the National Security Agency. 
 JS: Um ..This is a person -- I am a person, who has zero mathematical ability, took tutoring for algorithms in high school. 
 MLK: Not just that, but Sanborn swears he's terrible at keeping secrets. 
 JS: And ..um.. I'm finding that it's increasingly difficult to keep that kind of information secret because the closer people get to cracking the last 97 characters, the more difficult it is to say absolutely nothing about ..what it does or does not say, and so, it's tough. 
 MLK: In fact, Sanborn just dropped a clue right there. Listen again: 
 JS: ...the closer people get to cracking the last ninety-seven characters... 
 MLK: Whether the final unsolved passage is, in fact, ninety-seven or ninety-eight characters has been hotly debated. There's a question mark that some have argued 
 indicates the end of the third passage, others the beginning of the fourth. Now you know. The first person known to have solved the first three passages was a CIA analyst who “noodled” around for years until he had a breakthrough in the late nineties. The National Security Agency confirms that three of its cryptographers have gotten to the same point. Though it declines to say who, or how, or when. The first civilian to crack parts one, two and three was Jim Gillogly, a California computer researcher. He says, that process took him four nights. 
 JG: For part four, I would say I probably have put in several hundred hours over the course of ..I guess it's been six years now. 
 MKL: Part four is so hard because it's short, which means fewer chances to spot recurring patterns, and there's another hurdle, according to Ed Scheidt, the CIA's former chief cryptographer. Back in 1989, Scheidt was about to retire when his bosses asked him to work with Jim Sanborn on his new sculpture. The two collaborated for several months, creating a set of increasingly difficult codes for the four Kryptos passages. In the first three, Scheidt says “..you could rely on the fact that in English some letters occur more frequently than others..”. 
 ES: For instance, if you could determine that the number of E's vs. the number of Z's in the English language, then you would have some insight into the potential words that they made up, because there are more E's in the English language than there are Z's. 
 MKL: But Scheidt says in part four he deliberately masked that advantage. Kryptos sleuths speculate that could mean anything from random Q's and X's being thrown in to phonetic spellings such as writing the number four, “PHOAR”. Scheidt insists even he doesn't know exactly how it turned out, that though he helped with the basic structure of the code, he's never tried to crack Sanborn's final message. And Jim Sanborn, sole guardian of Kryptos' secret, is keeping mum. He says the CIA required him to hand over a sealed copy of the solution at Kryptos' dedication ceremony, and Sanborn says he did.. kind of. 
 JS: I don't really believe I gave them the entire code. So, ..um.. you know, if it was a deception on my part, hey, so-be-it [exhales]. You have to play the game the way.. everyone else, you know, at the agency plays the game. 
 MKL: That kind of coyness drives Kryptos aficionados crazy. Nevertheless, their numbers keep growing. Dan Brown, author of The Da Vinci Code, has drawn new followers to the cause by hinting that his next thriller might somehow contain a Kryptos connection. Gary Warzin founded an online discussion group, devoted to Kryptos. Warzin says his biggest torment is a sneaking suspicion that part four is actually really easy. 
 GW: In the first three parts, it really was somebody putting in the hours and putting in the hard work and figuring it out. My suspicion is that when the last part gets solved, it's not going to be the hours and it's not going to be the hard work. It's going to be a "eureka moment”, sort of a "ta-dah" when somebody sees what the simple rule is, that tells you how to decrypt it. 
 MLK: Maybe. Sculptor Jim Sanborn offers a final clue, that part four isn't the end. He nods when asked whether all four Kryptos passages will turn out to be linked, and says, “whoever cracks part four will then, be at the beginning of the puzzle”. Mary Louise Kelley .. NPR News, Washington 
 
 2005-06-11 - The Guardian 
 Interest grows in solving cryptic CIA puzzle after link to Da Vinci Code 
 *** Julian Borger *** in Washington 
 Sat 11 Jun 2005 07.23 EDT 
 It is one of the world's most baffling puzzles, the bane of professional cryptologists and amateur sleuths who have spent 15 years trying to solve it. 
 But the race to find the secrets of Kryptos, a sculpture inside a courtyard at the CIA's heavily guarded headquarters in Langley, Virginia, may be reaching a climax. 
 And interest has soared since Dan Brown hid references to Kryptos on the cover design for his bestselling novel The Da Vinci Code , and suggested it might play a role in his next novel, The Solomon Key. 
 The Kryptos sculpture incorporates a coded message made up of thousands of letters punched through a nearly 4 meter (12ft) high copper scroll. 
 Though it was installed where only CIA agents and cryptographers could see it, amateur code-breakers have worked away on transcripts posted on the CIA's website. 
 Three-quarters of the code has been broken, and the deciphered message so far appears to point to something momentous buried on CIA grounds. 
 But the clues are obscure and the fourth passage of the Kryptos code - known as K4 to the addicted - has remained impenetrable. 
 However, Elonka Dunin, who runs the most comprehensive website on Kryptos ( www.elonka.com/kryptos ) said recent activity has surged. 
 "My baseline was about 500-600 unique visitors a day. But I recently got 30,000 over a 24-hour period," said Ms Dunin, an executive at a Missouri-based internet game company, Simutronics. 
 No one is more amazed at the sudden excitement than Kryptos's creator, Jim Sanborn, who was hired in 1989 by the CIA director at the time, William Webster. 
 Mr Sanborn worked with a CIA cryptographer, Ed Scheidt, to produce the coded sculpture, consisting of the S-shaped copper scroll, a petrified tree, a water-filled basin and stones marked with fragments of Morse code and a compass. Placing it in the thick of many of the best code-breakers in the world, they never thought it would take this long. 
 "These were events I thought would take months not years," Mr Sanborn, a Washington-based sculptor, told the Guardian. 
 The references to Kryptos on the jacket of The Da Vinci Code were only spotted recently. Now Mr Sanborn is worried that the religious and spiritual overtones of Brown's books could settle on his sculpture. 
 "Somehow I've been drawn into that vortex," he said. 
 With that in mind, Mr Sanborn is taking precautions. 
 "I have taken all Kryptos-related material from my house and studio," he said. "The crypto' world has its share of crazies." 
 It took eight years for the first three Kryptos passages to be cracked, by a CIA officer named David Stein, after a total of 400 hours with pen and paper. 
 He was hit, he later wrote "by that sweetly ecstatic, rare experience that I have heard described as a 'moment of clarity'." 
 This being the CIA, the solution was kept a secret, but it was solved separately by Jim Gillogly, a California computer scientist, who published the first three passages in 1999. 
 They both used the same method, relying on the fact that the English language uses letters with varying frequencies, allowing code-breakers to calculate which ciphers represent which letters. 
 The fourth passage has been masked to make that impossible. So far, Mr Gillogly, one of America's best cryptologists, says he has spent "a couple of hundred hours spread over six years" on the 97 remaining letters, with no success. 
 The solution so far includes a couple of misspellings which Mr Sanborn has said are deliberate. 
 It gives the coordinates of a spot which seems to be on CIA grounds, and says "only WW" knows the exact location, an apparent reference to William Webster. 
 It then quotes the diary entry of the archaeologist Howard Carter on finding Tutankhamen's tomb. 
 After completing the sculpture, Mr Sanborn had to hand Mr Webster an envelope containing the solution, but now suggests he gave neither Mr Webster nor Mr Scheidt, the full story. He insists the fourth passage is decipherable and would not be surprised if it were solved soon. " It's being barraged right now, " he said. 
 Some of the "addicts" are going to remarkable lengths to solve Kryptos. 
 Gary Phillips, 27, told the Guardian he had abandoned his software company so that he could devote more time to the code puzzle. 
 "I can see how some might perceive that I made a sacrifice by closing my business and pursuing Kryptos," Mr Phillips, a Michigan programmer, said. 
 But he added: "Kryptos brought me back to my first love. Like my childhood programming days, I was once again free to pursue a challenge that didn't have the limitations of 'this is how to do it'." 
 Mr Sanborn admits he would feel a tinge of regret if Kryptos is solved. He said: " All of us should hope it does survive. There are codes in all our lives that we hope are never deciphered." 
 
 2005-06-20 - CNN 
 Mysterious 'Kryptos' sculpture challenges CIA employees 
 From Justine Redman and David Ensor CNN Monday, June 20, 2005; Posted: 5:29 a.m. EDT (09:29 GMT) 
 "Kryptos," the large S-shaped wood and copper sculpture, sits outside the CIA cafeteria. 
 WASHINGTON (CNN) -- It's been hidden in plain sight at CIA headquarters for 15 years: a message, buried in code, on a large S-shaped copper and wood sculpture called "Kryptos." 
 "Kryptos," which means "hidden" in ancient Greek, was created by artist Jim Sanborn in 1990. Ever since, CIA staff have tried to crack the code as it sits outside their cafeteria. 
 "Does anybody know, besides you, what that section says?" CNN's National Security correspondent David Ensor asked Sanborn. 
 "I don't think so," he replied. 
 Now the race to decipher "Kryptos" has spread worldwide, accelerated by Dan Brown's best-selling book "The Da Vinci Code." Though the novel itself doesn't mention "Kryptos," the book's jacket holds references to it. Those references might not have been recognized but for a game on the publisher's Web site which states: 
 "Disguised on the jacket of The Da Vinci Code, numerous encrypted messages hint at the subject matter of Dan Brown's next Robert Langdon novel. And while their ultimate meaning will not be revealed here, we will give you clues as to how to locate and decipher them." 
 As the book's popularity soared, so did the sculpture's. 
 A Web forum where cryptographers collaborate on the puzzle went from attracting about 50 hits a day to thousands of hits a day, according to its moderator Elonka Dunin. 
 Moment of discovery 
 One of the sections of "Kryptos" that has been de-coded is a quote from the description by archaeologist Howard Carter of the moment when he discovered the tomb of Tutankhamen, the ancient Egyptian pharaoh. 
 "With trembling hands, I made a tiny breach in the upper left-hand corner, and then widening the hole a little, I inserted a candle and peered in." 
 "I don't presume to think that "Kryptos" sculpture has the import that finding T utankhamen's tomb would have," Sanborn says, "but it's that same magic of finding something, finding a fossil or finding an Indian arrow head or something like that. It's magical, because it's something that was made in the past. So I wanted to somehow demonstrate that magic, for everyone, once it was cracked." 
 When Sanborn received his commission from the CIA, he had no experience in codes, but he learned quickly from retired CIA cryptographer Ed Scheidt. 
 The sculpture is a tribute to cryptography -- the analyzing and deciphering of complex codes written in numbers, letters and symbols. 
 Sanborn borrowed from the 16th century French cryptographer Blaise de Vigenere and the cryptographic method of transposing letters or changing their position in a message according to whatever method the writer devised. 
 But how did a novice come up with such a complex code? 
 "We all have codes. What's your ATM PIN number?" Sanborn explains. "So this was just one that I did, and I don't think it's unusual to design a code that's difficult to crack. I don't think it's hard, either." 
 Part of what has made "Kryptos" challenging is that few people actually get to see the sculpture because of its location. Even CNN wasn't allowed to visit the CIA site. 
 A photo of "Kryptos" appears on the CIA's Web site and describes it "as a piece of petrified wood supported by a large S-shaped copper screen that looks like a piece of paper coming out of a computer printer. On the 'paper' are inscribed several enigmatic messages, each written in a different code." 
 Sanborn did let CNN have a look at his little-known sister sculpture on the grounds of the Hirshhorn Gallery in Washington D.C. That artwork, titled "Antipodes," contains the same text, although it lacks some of the physical clues scattered on the CIA grounds. 
 Other clues have come, over the years, from the artist himself. Sanborn chooses his words carefully, and "Kryptos" enthusiasts comb through them even more carefully. 
 
 2005-06-21 - CNN 
 Sanborn:  'Kryptos' sculpture was 'an obsession' Tuesday, June 21, 2005; Posted:  1: 24 p.m. EDT (17: 24 GMT) Artist Jim Sanborn 
 WASHINGTON (CNN) -- Since 1990, CIA staff members have been trying to crack the code that artist Jim Sanborn wrote into his sculpture "Kryptos," which sits outside the cafeteria at CIA headquarters. 
 Now the race to decipher "Kryptos" has spread worldwide, accelerated by the popularity of Dan Brown's best-selling book "The Da Vinci Code." Though the novel itself doesn't mention "Kryptos," the book's jacket holds references to it. 
 CNN national security correspondent David Ensor talked to Sanborn, who says he's the only one who knows what the code says. These are excerpts from their conversation: 
 **ENSOR : *What were you trying to achieve with this sculpture? 
 SANBORN: A long viewing existence. I mean, any artist wants to make a piece that endures. I made it out of copper and stone, basically. But what seems to have endured is the content and the code, and I mean, in that respect it's succeeded beyond my wildest dreams, because as the code is disclosed slowly -- which was a plan -- it seems to be staying in the spotlight, which is great. 
 **ENSOR : *How did you get this assignment at CIA? Were you especially interested in code for some reason? 
 SANBORN: No, but I had tremendous interests in making things which are invisible visible. All through the 1980s what I was working with at that time was things called load stones, and the Earth's magnetic field. Basically, the Earth's magnetic field is an invisible natural force, and I chose to show it visually by setting up large arrays of hundred and hundreds of compass needles that were all aligned north and south. Instead of a small little compass that gives you very small information, I tried to demonstrate the large power the Earth's magnetic field has. 
 So I was selected based on that work, of dealing with invisible forces. So, the invisible forces of nature was what I was dealing with, so there was a conceptual leap in that I could work equally well with the invisible forces of mankind. 
 **ENSOR : *Were CIA officials willing to have you put this sculpture on their property without them knowing what it says on it, at all? With no one knowing? 
 SANBORN: Not exactly. When I conceived of the idea to do an encoded piece for the CIA, I was determined to keep it absolutely secret from the agency and everyone else. Then I thought about it, and I said well, you know, the agency's going to want to know what I said for obvious reasons. You know, did I write something pornographic, did I write something that absolutely torpedoed the agency? And so I offered it -- actually, the agency suggested that I give it to the Department of Historical Intelligence. 
 So I, with trepidation, said OK, how am I going to do this without giving them something tangible to remember? And so I went into the office of Historical Intelligence, which at that time was comprised of three people in a fairly dark room. And I had three pieces of paper with me, and I asked, "Listen, who has the best memory? I really want to entrust this code with the person with the best memory." 
 And two of the people pointed to one person and said, "She has an institutional memory. She remembers everything." And I asked her to leave the room. 
 So then I had two pieces of paper with the same thing on it. Which basically had the code, the plain text, but it was scrambled in such a way that you could read sentences, but you wouldn't get the whole picture. Sort of a need to know situation. So they, the two people, started reading it, and I realized quickly, and they realized quickly, the import of what they were doing. Because frankly, if I had deceived them in some way, and they had read this and said, "Oh, this is fine," and then the sculpture had gone up and it wasn't fine, then it was their job on the line. 
 It was a tremendous responsibility that they ended up not being able to accept. So at that time it was decided that I would give the code to William Webster at the dedication ceremony, which I did. In a sealed envelope, as carefully masked in such a way that you couldn't see inside as I could do at the time. 
 **ENSOR : *References to this sculpture appear on the cover of "The Da Vinci Code," probably the most popular book in sales in our time. What's been the impact of "The Da Vinci Code" coming out on the interest level in these sculptures? 
 SANBORN: There's a woman called Elonka Dunin who has a Web site on the "Kryptos" sculpture. And before "The Da Vinci Code," she was getting like 50 hits a day on the Web site. And now she's getting thousands, basically. I know that the agency was getting just a few hits a day on the "Kryptos" sculpture; they're now getting thousands of hits a day on the "Kryptos" sculpture. So it's a pretty stunning change. 
 **ENSOR : *When you developed this work of art, did you ever imagine it would become the kind of obsession it has become for some people today? 
 SANBORN: Well, it was an obsession of mine, and when I designed the piece, I said to myself, you know, when an artist does a public artwork, which is -- this is sort of the quintessential public artwork because it's in the public eye in a large way -- you want to do artwork which will retain interest. I did know there was something special, certainly, about the site. 
 You don't do something for the CIA and expect it just to go away, and nobody ever hears about it again, because it's for the CIA. So I took out all the stops. I mean, I gave the agency as much as I possibly could, physically, and as the number of objects I put there. And I made nothing from the project. 
 So I put all my eggs in that basket, assuming that it would work for me in tangible ways later. And it has. I mean, the commissioned work and the success I've had in doing large-scale artworks outdoors, or public artwork, has been significant. And so a lot of artists do artwork just for the resume, and just to have photographs of it and say they did it. 
 This is one of those pieces where I made very little monetary ... I made nothing monetarily from it, but I knew that the PR would certainly help my future work. 
 **ENSOR : *There's one piece of the code that has not yet been cracked, right? Does anybody know, besides you, what that says? 
 SANBORN: I don't think so. You know, I've done my best to distance myself, actually, from what I wrote. And when the passages that were deciphered already were cracked, I had to go back to my notes to figure out what I'd written. And it's the same with this most recent code as well. When it's cracked, if it's cracked, in my lifetime, I'm certainly going to have to refresh my memory as far as what I wrote. Which is my only way of keeping a secret, frankly. I'm not good at it. 
 **ENSOR : *How did you, a novice, come up with code that nobody's been able to break today? 
 SANBORN: Well the reality is that I'm in a unique position:  I'm an artist, OK? I'm not a mathematician, but I do have other skills, more visual skills, that were brought to bear in designing the code. Ed Scheidt, the cryptographer who I worked with, who's retired from the agency, gave me an overview of encoding systems, and worked with me. We met in secret locations at the time. It seems ridiculous, but we felt it necessary to develop something. Then he gave me the systems. I was able to modify them to my own ends. 
 **ENSOR : *What can you tell me about what the last bit says? The part that we don't know about. What can you say about that? 
 SANBORN: Let's just think of the last passage of the "Kryptos" as being like sand in an hourglass. At this point in time, every little grain of sand that leaves that hourglass is a clue, right? 
 And so, the further along we go, and the more the layers of the onion are unraveled, and the closer we get to cracking the "Kryptos" sculpture, the tinier the grain is that would be responsible for cracking that code. 
 So I've had to be very careful about the wording, what I say at any given time over all the years. I was very glib in 1990, '94, when these stories first broke about the "Kryptos" sculpture. I am far less glib now. Loose lips, you know? 
 
 2005-07-05 - CTV 
 Interest soars in solving the CIA's 'Kryptos' 
 Updated Tue. Jul. 5 2005 10:10 PM ET 
 CTV.ca News Staff 
 For 15 years, a sculpture known as Kryptos has stood in a courtyard inside the heavily guarded Central Intelligence Agency headquarters in Langley, Virginia. 
 Its coded message, made up of thousands of letters on a copper scroll, has stumped code breakers for 15 years. And although it's been seven years since anyone has made any progress cracking it, there's been an explosion of renewed interest in Kryptos since writer Dan Brown hid references to it on the jacket of The Da Vinci Code -- one of the hottest books in North America. 
 And that has made life interesting for Kryptos' creator, James Sanborn. Kryptos -- Greek for "hidden" -- seems to have attracted its fare share of fanatics. 
 "I've had to remove anything associated with Kryptos from my studio and home and I've considered (getting) an unlisted number, " Sanborn told CTV's Joy Malbon at Washington's Hirshorn museum, where a miniature version of Kryptos is on display. 
 "Like Dorothy and Toto I've been sucked into the wizard of spies." 
 Though it's installed in an area only CIA agents and cryptographers are allowed to roam, code-breakers can work at solving the mystery on transcripts posted on the CIA's website. 
 Three-quarters of the Kryptos code has been broken, but it's remaining 97 letters have the best of the best code breakers stumped. 
 Code cracker Jim Gillogly is one of two men who were able to crack three of the messages, which contain: a reference to the discovery of King Tut's tomb; a poem; and a reference to something buried on CIA grounds. 
 "I was so excited I was bouncing off the walls. It was difficult for my wife to reel me down after I got the first part cracked," Gillogly told CTV News. 
 "Here's this puzzle sitting like a thumb in the eye of the intelligence agency, saying if you're so smart, what's this say?" 
 Sanborn worked for months with a retired CIA cryptographer to devise the codes used in Kryptos. 
 Based on a report by CTV's Washington Bureau Chief, Joy Malbon 
 
 2006-04-06 - Wired 
 Typo Confounds Kryptos Sleuths 
 Cryptographers have driven themselves crazy for over a decade trying to solve the encrypted sculpture at CIA headquarters. Now the sculptor reveals a mistake that misled the puzzlers. Can a solution be far way? By Kim Zetter. 
 FOR MORE THAN a decade, amateur and professional cryptographers have been trying to decipher an encrypted sculpture that sits on the grounds of the CIA headquarters in Langley, Virginia. Three-fourths of the sculpture has already been solved. 
 But now Jim Sanborn, the artist who created the *Kryptos *sculpture, says he made a mistake. A previously solved part of the puzzle that sleuths assumed was correct for years isn't. The new information, including what the mistaken text really says, is creating a buzz among enthusiasts who've been obsessed over the sculpture for years. 
 It all comes down to a letter that Sanborn left out of the sculpture. He only recently realized the omission was leading sleuths down a misguided path. His followers, however, aren't feeling any grief about the misdirection. 
 "Any time we get the sculptor saying anything for sure, it's cause for celebration," says Elonka Dunin, a game developer for Simutronics and co-moderator of a Yahoo group devoted to *Kryptos *who also maintains a comprehensive website about the sculpture. "We love to get any information out of him that we can." 
 Dunin, author of a new book of codes and puzzles that includes a couple of pages about the *Kryptos *mystery, said Sanborn called her Wednesday to announce the mistake. She says knowing the correct interpretation will help the group refocus its efforts and abandon dead ends its members have been pursuing since 1999. 
 Kryptos , which means "hidden" in Greek, sits outside a cafeteria on the CIA grounds and consists of a large block of petrified wood standing upright, with a copper plate scrolling out of the wood like a sheet of paper in the shape of an S. The sculpture contains approximately 1,800 letters carved out of the copper plate in four sections, some of which form an encryption table used for deciphering the rest of the sculpture. 
 In 1999, California computer scientist Jim Gillogly solved three of the four sections. A CIA analyst named David Stein reached the same solution for those sections a year earlier, but his work remained unknown to anyone outside the CIA until Gillogly came forward with his solution. 
 The first section of the sculpture was decrypted to a poetic phrase created by Sanborn. The second refers to something possibly buried on the CIA grounds : Does Langley know about this? They should: It's buried out there somewhere.*The third section is text from archaeologist Howard Carter's diary describing the opening of a door in King Tut's tomb Nov. 26, 1922 . 
 The fourth part has remained stubbornly unsolved. The sculpture received a lot of renewed interest last year after Wired News published a story discussing author Dan Brown's references to it in the book jacket for The Da Vinci Code . Since then, thousands of new sleuths have been obsessing over the code. Chris Hanson, co-moderator of the Yahoo group and a Colorado programmer who runs a 3-D landscape software company called 3D Nature , created a model of the CIA's building complex, complete with landscaped grounds, to study the sculpture's surroundings for clues. Another member of the group even reportedly quit his job to devote time to cracking the code. 
 Sanborn has said that clues to the last section, which has only 97 letters, are contained in previously deciphered parts. Therefore getting those first three sections correct is crucial. 
 Sanborn realized only this week that the original decryption was incorrect while doing a letter-by-letter comparison of the plain text and coded text in preparation for a nonfiction book he's producing about the life of the sculpture and the unexpected interest it's garnered. 
 The mistake involves an "x" that Sanborn intentionally deleted from the end of a line in section two for aesthetic reasons, to keep the sculpture visually balanced. The "x" was supposed to signify a period or section break at the end of a phrase but Sanborn removed it thinking it wouldn't affect the way the puzzle was deciphered. It turns out the "x" made all the difference. 
 What Gillogly and others deciphered to read "ID by rows" actually should read "layer two." What that means, however, is still a mystery. 
 "It's only eight letters and we still don't know what the rest of it says, but this is a real step forward," says Hanson. "Jim (Gillogly's) work in (1999) was the last time we got anything new out of this puzzle -- everything since then has been fruitless experimentation." 
 Sanborn said the error went unnoticed for years because he's avoided looking carefully at the text for fear that he would somehow leak clues about it. 
 "I'd tried this whole process to distance myself as much as possible from the code and to not pay attention to what was going on because it helped me to not say anything," he says. "As a result this little mistake came through." 
 The entire passage was previously decrypted to read: This was his last message: x Thirty-eight degrees fifty-seven minutes six point five seconds North, seventy-seven degrees eight minutes forty-four seconds West. ID by rows. 
 Sanborn said when someone first read him Gillogly's solution years ago he thought "ID by rows" was cryptographer's jargon, meant to be a notation about how cryptographers decrypted the text, not an actual part of the decrypted text. He maintained that assumption every time he saw the decrypted text re-created on websites over the years, until he did the line-by-line comparison. 
 "Then I discovered they were, in fact, missing a clue, and it bothers me if they put 'id by rows' in instead of 'layer two,'" he says. "They didn't have everything to work with that I wanted them to have to work with." 
 Since getting the new clue Wednesday, Hanson has been trying to figure out the significance of "layer two." He thinks it could indicate that if one side of the sculpture is folded and layered over the other side, it will provide clues to the puzzle. 
 "I've been drinking Mountain Dew and eating Easter Jelly Bellies to sharpen my mind," he says. 
 He says the new information was the equivalent of throwing a steak into shark-infested water. "There's going to be a frenzy of action around this for months because it's the first real bit of data we've been able to get. We don't know what it means. But it's very exciting." 
 
 2006-04-21 - NPR All things Considered - LAYERTWO 
 04/21/2006 NPR’s All Things Considered Enigmatic CIA Puzzle ’Kryptos’ may Be Flawed Time: (4:28) URL:: http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=4684720 
 https://www.npr.org/2005/06/09/4684720/cia-experts-still-spooked-by-kryptos-puzzle 
 R: Reporter JS: James Sanborn ED: Elonka Dunin Transcribed By: Jew-Lee Irena Lann 
 R: The CIA has more than a few mistakes over the last couple of years. Well, here’s one that’s not the agency’s fault. The story comes, to us, by way of wired news and it has to do with the sculpture, on the grounds of CIA Headquarters, in Langley, Virginia. The sculpture has baffled code-breakers for years. It’s called Kryptos and it features nearly two-thousand letters, divided into four sections. Three of those coded sections have been solved. But, just this week, the artist and the author of this code revealed that there is an error. And that could be why sleuths have had a hard time figuring out the last part of the puzzle. To help us sort through what happened, we got the sculpture, Jim Sanborn on the phone, with game developer and part-time Kryptos devotee, Elonka Dunin. 
 ED: An analogy, that I use when I am trying to describe the situation to non-cryptographers is Jim came up with a recipe for something and then he gave us the recipe, but he wanted to make it look good on the page, so he remove one element without paying a lot of attention to which element he’d removed. And he accidently removed a key ingredient...like he’d removed yeast. And we took the recipe and we made what the recipe said. And we said “Hey, Jim it tasted really great! Thanks!” and then...but, later when he checked on it, he was like, “Opps..They ending up making cookies and I intended for them to make ..cupcakes”.[Reporter and Elonka laughs] 
 ED: And so he let us know, that well, there’s one little piece ...that you probably want to try cooking it again. An..And so we’re like very grateful and saying ..So ok tha... well we had a lot of fun, with what we did before, but it good to know that we’re going to make it the way you actually intended. So, thank you. 
 
 ED: Huh?..Now Jim, this missing ingredient, if..if I understand this right, was the letter “X”, that you had taken off of one line, for aesthetic reasons. It didn’t..didn’t balance. 
 JS: Yeah. I mean I..I ..uh..[Exhales]...there were several ways I could manipulate the lines of text so I would end up with with a panel that is square on the sides. Because a “M” is much longer than an “O”...if you have many “M”s, then you have a longer line. And so I wanted it ...So I wanted to have some control. So there were some things I choose to lef..leave out. And I did leave an “X” out. The “X”s, more or less, represent a..a period. But, because a period isn’t really easy to encode, I choose to use “X”s. So, after the end of each phrase, I would put an “X”. Well, in taking this one “X” out, the cryptophers were, you know, going swimming along and thinking that they’d gotten the whole thing and it wasn’t a period. And...and it is interesting that you leave out one little period, and it makes such a huge difference. 
 R: E..E..Elonka, this all hinges on this troublesome panel, which is called part two, of the puzzle. 
 R: It’s a few sentences. And what we thought it said was: 
 It was totally invisible How’s that possible? They used the Earth’s magnetic field X The information was gathered and transmitted undergruund to an unknown location X 
 Does Langley know about this? They should Its buried out there somewhere X Who knows the exact location? Only WW This was his last message X Thirty eight degrees fifty seven minutes six point five seconds north Seventy seven degrees eight minutes forty four seconds west ID by rows 
 And then what it actually says, now that we have this... Jim.. fine.. I will just say the last sentence is..: 
 Thirty eight degrees fifty seven minutes six point five seconds north Seventy seven degrees eight minutes forty four seconds west X Layer Two 
 R: Well, it’s all perfectly clear to me now. [Reporter and Elonka laughs] Thank you for straightening that out. 
 ED: Yeah. 
 R: Le..let me try to break this down a little bit. This wrong version, id by rows, has been out there for what?..almost eight years, now. Right? 
 JS: That’s right. 
 R: So..so Elonka, is..is one of the things that you said to Jim is ..uh.. “Jim, wha..what took you so long?” 
 ED: [Laughs] No, I was actually very excited. One of our questions, all along, especially about part four is: Is the reason that it hasn’t been solved yet, because there’s a mistake in it somewhere? And..and so I’m very pleased to hear that Jim is going through, and checking his work. [Reporter and Elonka laughs] because if there is another mistake in K4....and I don’t know if he’s work backwards through that yet.. 
 JS: [Interjects] No, that one’s actually safe and sound and fairly accurate. 
 R: Your sure about that, Jim? 
 JS: Yes..I’m pretty sure about that one. 
 R: Well, Elonka Dunin, good luck figuring out part four. 
 ED: Thank you. 
 R: and Jim Sanborn, thanks for being with us. 
 JS: Thank you. 
 R: Jim Sanborn is the artist who created the Kryptos sculpture at the CIA Headquarters, in Langley, Virginia. Elonka Dunin is a game developer and a co-moderator of a yahoo group devoted to cracking the code of Kryptos. 
 
 2006-04-22 - NYT 
 A Break for Code Breakers on a C.I.A. Mystery 
 By Kenneth Chang 
 April 22, 2006 
 For nearly 16 years, puzzle enthusiasts have labored to decipher an 865-character coded message stenciled into a sculpture on the grounds of the Central Intelligence Agency's headquarters in Langley, Va. This week, the sculptor gave them an unsettling but hopeful surprise: part of the message they thought they had deciphered years ago actually says something else. 
 The sculpture, titled "Kryptos," the Greek word for "hidden," includes an undulating sheet of copper with a message devised by the sculptor, Jim Sanborn, and Edward M. Scheidt, a retired chairman of the C.I.A.'s cryptographic center. 
 The message is broken into four sections, and in 1999, a computer programmer named Jim Gillogly announced he had figured out the first three, which include poetic ramblings by the sculptor and an account of the opening of King Tut's tomb. The C.I.A. then announced that one of its physicists, David Stein, had also deciphered the first three sections a year earlier. 
 On Wednesday afternoon, Mr. Sanborn left a phone message for Elonka Dunin, a computer game developer who also runs an e-mail list for enthusiasts trying to solve the "Kryptos" puzzle. For the first time, Mr. Sanborn had done a line-by-line analysis of his text with what Mr. Gillogly and Mr. Stein had offered as the solution and discovered that part of the solved text was incorrect. 
 Within minutes, Ms. Dunin called back, and Mr. Sanborn told her that in the second section, one of the X's he had used as a separator between sentences had been omitted, altering the solution. "He was concerned that it had been widely published incorrectly," Ms. Dunin said. 
 Mr. Sanborn's admission was first reported Thursday by Wired News. 
 Ms. Dunin excitedly started sending instant messages online to Chris Hanson, the co-moderator of the "Kryptos" e-mail group. Within an hour, Ms. Dunin figured out what was wrong. The last eight characters of the second section, which describes something possibly hidden on C.I.A. grounds, had been decoded as "IDBYROWS" which people read as "I.D. by rows" or "I.D. by Row S." 
 In an interview yesterday, Mr. Sanborn said he had never meant that at all. To give himself flexibility as he carved the letters into the copper sheet, he had marked certain letters that could be left out. In the second passage, he left out an X separator before these eight letters. 
 "It was purely an act of aesthetics on my part," he said. 
 He said he expected that the encryption method, which relies on the position of the letters, would transform that part of the message into gibberish, and that the solvers would know to go back and reinsert the missing separator. But " remarkably, when you used the same system, it said something that was intelligible ," Mr. Sanborn said. He decided to let the code breakers know about the error because " they weren't getting the whole story ," he said. 
 When Ms. Dunin reinserted the X, the eight characters became "LAYERTWO." She called Mr. Sanborn again, who confirmed that was the intended message. "It's a surprise, and it's exciting," Ms. Dunin said. That is the first real progress on "Kryptos" in more than six years. Now to figure out what it means. 
 In an e-mail interview, Mr. Gillogly said that the corrected text, "layer two," is "intriguing but scarcely definitive." He added, "Like much of the sculpture, it can be taken in many ways." Mr. Gillogly, who has not worked much on the puzzle in recent years, said he would go back to see if the answer was now apparent. 
 One possibility is that "layer two" is the crucial key for solving the rest of the puzzle. Or it could be a hint that the letters need to be layered atop one another. Mr. Sanborn and Mr. Scheidt have said that even when all of the text is unraveled, other puzzles will remain in "Kryptos." 
 " This new discovery could possibly make it easier to crack and possibly not make it easier to crack ," Mr. Sanborn offered unhelpfully. " It may be a dead-end diversion I like to send people on, a primrose lane to nowhere ." 
 Mr. Scheidt said it had taken only three or four months to devise a puzzle that has lasted nearly 16 years, adding that only he, Mr. Sanborn and "probably someone at C.I.A." know the answer. 
 For everyone else, the remaining 97 letters of the fourth section remain baffling (the slashes indicate line breaks): 
 ?OBKR/UOXOGHULBSOLIFBBWFLRVQQPRNGKSSO/TWTQSJQSSEKZZWATJKLUDIAWINFBNYP/VTTMZFPKWGDKZXTJCDIGKUHUAUEKCAR 
 
 2007-07-01 - NOVA Interview 
 [ Editorial note, many sections are not highlighted since this is an interview . I tried to highlight sections that pertained to Kryptos.] 
 FOR 
 WGBH Eductional Foundation—“Nova” 1 East 28th St., 6 th Floor New York, NY 10016 
 DATE 
 PROGRAM 
 “NOVA Science Now” “Kryptos” KR 103 Jim Sanborn 
 BGT NO. 
 FOR 
 WGBH Educational Foundation - NOVA 1 West 28th Street. 6th Floor New York, NY 10016 
 DATE 
 PROGRAM 
 NOVA Science Now Kryptos Sanborn KR 102 
 BGT NO. 
 . 
 FOR 
 WGBH Educational Foundation - NOVA 1 West 28th Street. 6th Floor New York, NY 10016 
 DATE 
 PROGRAM 
 NOVA Science Now Kryptos Sanborn KR 101 
 BGT NO. 
 . 
 TP KR 101 
 INTERVIEWER So would you mind giving us a little tour of what’s in here? 
 JIM SANBORN Sure. [INAUDIBLE] Open this door a little bit, she can look in there, it might help. [BREAK IN AUDIO] 
 INTERVIEWER So yeah, what is this place? 
 JIM SANBORN Well, I’ve had this studio for about two years, and um, it is um, close to the water, close to Chesapeake bay [01:01:11:04], which I love, and um, I’ve made it very strong, because it houses all of the work that I’ve made for the last twenty years, basically. Um, so I told the engineer to build like a firehouse on the coast of Florida. And so, [01:01:25:12] hopefully it can take the, take the storms down here. Um, you might mistake this actually for a scientific laboratory instead of an art studio, and that’s just fine, because most of my studios have looked like scientific labs rather than art studios in the traditional sense. Um, of course, when I did the, the Kryptos project, the Kryptos project was based on a lot of stuff that I’d [01:01:47:10] done before, um, that was sort of, it was based on scientific stuff, and so the work that I'm doing now, years later, is still based on science. Um, the studio basically is um, part of it is storage, and those crates are all of my pieces from the, an exhibition I did called atomic time, [01:02:07:14] about the man, Manhattan Project and the building of the first atomic bomb. Um, the most recent project I'm working on is um, I'm recreating an experiment that happened in the nineteen thirties [01:02:19:23] at the Carnegie institution, and um, you might know that a lot of artists throughout history from the Egyptians to the Etruscans to you know, contemporary artists today, um, have depicted historic events, and so basically what I'm doing is I, I personally feel like the splitting of the atom, uh, the splitting of the nucleus of uranium, from which came medical, you know, radio, you know, medical x rays, um, from which comes, um, the problem with North Korea. Uh, nuclear reactors, um, and [01:02:57:12] nuclear weapons, and so I felt as if that was one of the most important moments in history, it was when we discovered that you could split the uranium atom and all of a sudden it would give off some power. So I am recreating that experiment, [01:03:10:21] and um, whereas a painter might do a painting of the event, as they, as it was remembered, um, I'm a sculptor, so I work three dimensionally, so I’ve decided to build it, physically build it so it is a three dimensional object that will actually work and operate and be able to split an atom. 
 INTERVIEWER That’s a very key difference between a painter, too. 
 JIM SANBORN [01:03:31:06] This is true… 
 INTERVIEWER This thing could actually work. 
 JIM SANBORN Yeah, it’s actually going to work. And I figure there’s no sense in making, I mean, for years I’ve made tableau. And objects which um, mis en scene it gives you, it gives you a sense of, of what was going on at a certain time, whether the event was geological, you know, whether some mystery, you know, um, Kryptos has a mystery to be solved, um, this one in some ways is more literal than [01:03:57:06] other pieces that I’ve done, but relates because um, what the, all of the work, including the Kryptos piece does is I said, deal with science, and it deals with that moment in science where pure science, like the science of Cryptography or whatever, all of a sudden it goes over to what’s called a technology, or can be bought and sold. So a pure science is a, you know, group of scientists going around, brainstorming an idea, will this work, will that work? Once they’ve decided that it does work, then somebody gets interested in it, and says, ok, well, we can make some money, or we might be able to you know, build a weapon, or whatever. And so that, that point in time is what interests me the most, and so that scientific transmutation [01:04:42:11] that occurs with a pure idea. 
 INTERVIEWER That one moment. 
 JIM SANBORN [01:04:47:28] That one moment. And that moment to me is typified by that moment when we split the atom. And it’s, it ushered in the atomic age, and most of the problems that we have or could potentially predict, will be associated with that moment in time, and so that’s why I felt strongly that I should recreate this machine. Aside from that, when I was twelve years old, my dad took me to the uh, Naval Research Laboratory, outside of Washington DC, and [01:05:13:07] took me to the nuclear reactor, and I remember climbing up on top of this big reactor, it was a pool of water, and I climbed up on top of it and looked down sort of between my legs at this blue glow, that was given off by this thing, and I was completely awestruck, and I was determined that I’d build a cyclotron in my parent’s basement, at the age of twelve. Well, that didn’t happen, thankfully, I didn’t irradiate the neighborhood. [01:05:36:14] So anyway, uh, you know, I think every artist has to draw on these latent desires that they have, and that’s what makes a person’s work uniquely theirs, and so rather than drawing from something somebody else has done, I prefer to go from my personal history, and so basically, yeah. 
 INTERVIEWER I'm sorry, no, no, does Kryptos have one of those moments? 
 JIM SANBORN [01:06:00:22] Well, I was always fascinated by uh, the whole concept of, the tradecraft issues of espionage, um, how you keep a secret, because I can’t keep secrets. I'm very bad at it. And uh… 
 INTERVIEWER You could, I think a lot of people would beg to differ with you. 
 JIM SANBORN [01:06:14:03] Well, yeah, that’s possibly true, but that’s only because I've distanced myself from it, and I try not to think about it, and I also put all the information about it away from me, so I don’t, I mean, at this point in time if somebody told me that they cracked Kryptos, I'm not convinced I’d be able to say yes, that’s it. 
 INTERVIEWER [LAUGHS] 
 JIM SANBORN [01:06:33:20] Because I, you know, I put it over there somewhere, you know, it’s just out of, out of mind, out of sight, out of mind. 
 INTERVIEWER That’s not exactly comforting to the people that are, to the thousands of [INAUDIBLE] 
 JIM SANBORN Well, I have ways, I have ways of finding I mean, I, it’s in, it’s in a couple of different safe deposit boxes, and so it, it’s pretty secure. Um, but yeah, the whole science thing fascinated me, and so um basically the process involved in my, my most recent project is that I'm building what’s called an electrostatic particle accelerator. And basically it consists of several elements. One is the, the electrostatic generator, that has to generate the five million volts. 
 INTERVIEWER You can take me [INAUDIBLE] 
 JIM SANBORN [01:07:14:11] And um, that’s, this is the base of this machine, um, this is an aluminum cylinder, um, that I’ve constructed that houses the equipment, the basic generator, the, the motors and belts and engines that generate the five million volts, and coming out of the top of this is a three foot diameter, nineteen foot high cylinder made out of fiberglass, on top of that there’s an eight foot diameter aluminum sphere. And so… 
 INTERVIEWER But this isn’t just a sculpture. I mean, this is, is it a sculpture to you? Is this… 
 JIM SANBORN [01:07:44:09] Well, I’ve made it, I’ve made it aesthetically. I mean, I didn’t have to make it as well as it’s made. I mean, it’s, you know, it sort of treads a very, I used to make a lot of artworks out of aluminum. And very finely tooled pieces back in the nineteen seventies. And so I’ve drawn on that knowledge of fabrication to be able to build this object as well as I have. And so basically, um, it is part art object, part operating machine, and I don’t really have problems with that duality of what I make. I mean, I don’t. It’s, I don’t make necessarily functional art, [01:08:16:06] but if that art can function, I think it, to me it adds to it. It adds to the reality of it. And so I thought that that was important. So this is the base of the machine. And then um… 
 INTERVIEWER We can take a look inside of this? 
 JIM SANBORN [01:08:33:04] Oh, yeah, well, sure, I mean, I, I basically have um, I’ve built it um, this is, inside there’s a mock up of what some of the machinery will look like, um, there's a, a, rollers, and motor and engine that power a belt that runs up through the column into the sphere at the top. And so… 
 INTERVIEWER So you’re going to build that too, or you can actually buy… 
 JIM SANBORN [01:08:54:09] Well, I can, I, buy the parts. This is basically a mock up made out of cardboard and paper. Um, that shows where the machinery’s going to go that’s going to operate this. Then there’s a transformer in here that generates thirty thousand volts. And so then that’s deposited on the belt and that’s taken up to the top, once this big cylinder at the top is charged up with hopefully close to four or five million volts, then it will discharge that voltage down this long accelerator tube that we have over here in the corner of the room. This is where the action more or less takes place in a particle accelerator. 
 INTERVIEWER Ok. 
 JIM SANBORN [01:09:26:06] Um, this is the interior, these are the electrodes of the part, of the accelerator, the accelerator tube is about eighteen feet long. And so that high voltage will be channeled down this accelerator tube, and the, the voltage will go between each of these separations and down the center of this, there will be an intense beam of particles. 
 INTERVIEWER Right. 
 JIM SANBORN So I introduce a, a very small amount of hydrogen gas, or another type of gas, in the top of the tube, then the high voltage more or less shoves that gas into a high speed, and then it will crash into a target, that will be at the end of this tube. 
 INTERVIEWER Ok. 
 JIM SANBORN [01:10:05:16] This, these are the internal electrodes, and the internal electrodes slide inside the glass tube you see over here, which is basically a large… 
 INTERVIEWER So this whole thing is going to fit into here. 
 JIM SANBORN [01:10:17:26] Yeah, it slides, it slides down inside here, and then this is, then once this is inside, and there are caps put on the ends, and the tubes are fastened together, then it’s put under a high vacuum, and then with the evacuated chamber like that, that means the voltage and, and energy and plasma that’s generated by the high voltage and gas will accelerate to a very high speed and be capable of splitting atoms at the end of this machine. 
 INTERVIEWER And with those split atoms, do you intend to… 
 JIM SANBORN [01:10:46:29] Well I am only, I am only doing, make, doing the act of splitting it. I'm not going to be using it, I'm not going to be irradiating large amounts of stuff. There will be very small amounts of radioactivity given off, but basically it’s more or less the act of doing it. I’ll be able to detect visually when this occurs by using something called a cloud chamber. [01:11:07:03] And at the bottom of this, and in the target room, there will be a chamber in which the particles you’ll actually be able to see trails that the particles leave in a vapor of dry ice. 
 INTERVIEWER Huh. 
 JIM SANBORN [01:11:15:09] And then I’ll photograph that. And that, that photodocumentation of that moment in time is to me, is as grand as you know, a painting of you know, uh, Guernica, in Picasso’s Guernica, you know, depicting the wars in, in Spain, so um, that’s what’s important to me. I'm also going to document the machine in operation. Um, you know, how it works the visuals, this whole machine is going to be placed on a pad out on the island here. And that’s where it’s going to operate. It’s going to operate outside. It’s too big to fit in this building, so the only thing we can do is take it outside, and have it operate outside. 
 INTERVIEWER And so ultimately, though, you are hoping that an art museum, or a science museum, or… 
 JIM SANBORN [01:12:03:07] Well, like other, like other projects that I’ve undertaken, um, like the project I do about the Manhattan Project, um, like those projects, the documentation of the objects and of that moment in time is what I would then put on a gallery wall, or a museum wall, and use as part of an installation for a museum installation. So ideally, I’d have a mus, be, the particle accelerator would be in an art museum, that’s capable of housing something that’s twenty eight feet high, um, it wouldn’t [01:12:38:13] really operate in the museum, but it would be there, and then the documentation of its operation would be on the walls around, and so you more or less get an idea of what happened, and see, because in addition to [01:12:49:10] I personally find that the science, the science, the ideas of the science are very seductive, but the materials of the science are also very seductive. Where, I mean, let’s just say a scientist, all, you know, somebody like Marie Curie, discovered that if she distills and boils down Uranium, then she can extract radium from it, she can get this material in a little tiny vial that glows in the dark, and gives off this amazing, has this amazing power, [01:13:14:28] both deadly and beneficent, in that it can cure cancer and things like this, and so the scientists all realized they had this incredible power in a very small area. And that’s very seductive. It makes you want to know more, it makes you want to have more. Make more, study more about it. It’s a fascinating thing. 
 INTERVIEWER So that tube of hers, to you, would be a piece of art. 
 JIM SANBORN [01:13:39:18] Well, for, well, for me, I mean, it’s not, I mean, it’s obviously just a, it’s a product that was made, but the whole idea surrounding it is magical, almost, because with, with nuclear power, you’re getting immense power from a very small amount of material. It’s not like coal or oil or anything like that. Not that I'm a supporter of nuclear power, it’s just that it’s very awe inspiring, and it was awe inspiring to the scientists doing [01:14:02:27] these projects, and this particle accelerator was one of the very first, this along with the cyclotron, were one of the very first big machines of science. 
 INTERVIEWER Mm-hmm. 
 JIM SANBORN [01:14:17:23] Science um, started out, you know, with smaller machines, and small little laboratories, and then the machines started getting bigger and bigger, and began to be called big science. So this is one of the very first big science machines. And I thought it fascinating that everything was just sort of scaled up. You need a gigantic machine to split something tiny, very, very small. And so um, but in addition to the seductivity of the ideas, the materials are beautiful. I, I personally think that the, the copper, the way it’s used, the glass, the brass, the bronze, the stainless steel, and all of these materials are very gorgeous, in themselves. 
 INTERVIEWER Are the materials that you’ve used, are they prettier than they were in the thirties? When [INAUDIBLE] 
 JIM SANBORN [01:15:03:02] Well, from what I understand that scientists that have seen what I do in general have said my stuff is probably a little bit more attractive than, than the, trashed lab they worked in. 
 INTERVIEWER Right. 
 JIM SANBORN [01:15:10:23] So I do, there are a tremendous number of aesthetic decisions I make when I'm making these things. I don’t make everything based entirely as a scientist would on it’s, you know, efficacy as, as being something that will operate well. 
 INTERVIEWER Sure. 
 JIM SANBORN [01:15:25:02] It has to function well visually for me, and so the accelerator tube is probably more gorgeous than the original, than the original tube, but that’s all part of it for me, as is the, the particle accelerator chamber. 
 INTERVIEWER As long as it works. 
 JIM SANBORN As long as it works. And then over in this end of the room, I have, I have several large, um, electronic chassis, these actually came from Los Alamos, um, in New Mexico, and were actually, these machines were actually used to develop the first atomic bomb. And I collected this equipment, and in, and all the equipment in these boxes um, from Los Alamos, over about a six year period, and amazingly, it still [01:16:03:05] works, I’ll plug them in over here, so you can see. 
 INTERVIEWER What do you mean, it works? What do you actually…. 
 JIM SANBORN [01:16:09:24] They still operate. Well, um, these machines, basically, were very sophisticated in, there is a sound associated with this. You can hear this clicking sound, and what that is is the sound of radioactivity with a Geiger counter. What these are is they’re very sophisticated counting machines, that count how intense radioactivity is. And the sound you hear right now is actually generated by these Geiger counters, sophis sophisticated Geiger count is detecting the radioactivity given off by little radium wristwatches that I have, that I have hidden inside of these, hidden inside of these machines, and so um… 
 INTERVIEWER So this dial look is important? As, I mean, this is, this is one of those dials that you always see when they’re… 
 JIM SANBORN [01:16:59:06] Well, that’s right. You know, and um, in, but the problem is most of this machinery generated very high, very dangerous voltages, and so I showed this equipment at several um, museums, and various places around the world, and I, a lot of kids look at it and a lot of kids want to touch everything, so I’ve made everything so it operates on very low voltage, so it isn't dangerous, physically dangerous anymore. Uh, but it is the original equipment, and I found a property, the property numbers associated um, with the Manhattan Project, and as a result, um, collected all of these objects from physicists in Los Alamos… 
 INTERVIEWER So this relates to the accelerator, then? 
 JIM SANBORN [01:17:41:01] Well, basically, it’s working backwards, it’s anachronistic. Um, the atomic bomb was more or less designed in Los Alamos, 1944, ’43, um, but before that, in the nineteen thirties, was when they learned that you could actually make an atomic bomb. And that you could split the nucleus of an atom. So the machine that they had to build to do that was this machine. Or one just like it. And um, so that’s why I'm, I'm actually working backwards. Um, so, and then on this table over here, I have another piece um, this was actually a piece of a project that I did previously uh, called atomic time, and it’s a um, a perfectly accurate representation of the first atomic bomb. Um, in this device, you have a large aluminum hemisphere, that’s very thick metal. This is what’s called a pusher sphere. 
 INTERVIEWE R Ok. 
 JIM SANBORN [01:18:44:27] Inside this there is a ball of uranium 238, represented here by bronze, and inside that ball, there slides a cylinder. And this cylinder is also uranium 238, and this cylinder mates with this cylinder, oh, brother. That’s my cell phone. [OFF CAMERA COMMENTS] [BREAK IN AUDIO] [OFF CAMERA COMMENTS] 
 INTERVIEWER Ok, so… 
 JIM SANBORN [01:19:15:29] Ok, then over here on this table, I’ve got a um, a representation of what actually is the first atomic bomb. And um… 
 INTERVIEWER First atomic bomb. 
 JIM SANBORN [01:19:24:23] The first atomic bomb, called the trinity, trinity device, and it was designed at Los Alamos in New Mexico, and detonated on uh, July sixteenth, 1945, um, in Alma Gorda, New Mexico. And um, I used um, various sources to determine, to find out exactly how it was constructed, um, some KGB documents, early on… 
 INTERVIEWER Really. 
 JIM SANBORN [01:19:47:15] Yeah. Um, lot of this information was still classified in the United States. And um, after 9/11, you can’t get any of this information, or it’s much harder to get than it was before. 
 INTERVIEWER Sure. 
 JIM SANBORN [01:19:59:16] Um, and basically it was constructed out of aluminum, this is aluminum, thick aluminum, it’s called a pusher sphere, and then inside that, there was a, a sphere made out of Uranium 238, and then there’s a cylinder made out of Uranium 238 that has a ball inside of it. This ball… 
 INTERVIEWER And this fits in here… 
 JIM SANBORN [01:20:18:29] Yeah, this piece fits in here, and um, this ball would be made out of plutonium and then inside the ball is a very tiny thing called the initiator, and these initiators are actually made by craftsmen and jewelers in the Manhattan Project, and so um, I had it made by a jeweler, myself, and so this actually was made out of polonium, and beryllium. When you take polonium, and beryllium, and you mix them together, they give off a burst of neutrons. And so when you have a, you have a burst of neutrons occurring inside a ball of plutonium, that makes the plutonium go critical, and makes it want to [01:20:57:24] expand violently into an atomic explosion. Well, the, the sphere of Uranium 238 contains this, massive expansion, just long enough to allow the plutonium to, to blow up and create an atomic explosion. And so basically I wanted to recreate the laboratory from 1944, 45 at Los Alamos. In order to recreate that moment in time, that event. 
 INTERVIEWER So this is the moment, this is our moment. 
 JIM SANBORN [01:21:26:10] Yeah, that, basically the culmination of all the US efforts to come up with a weapon of mass destruction, and more or less the very first one. And um, I thought that historic. And so that was a project that took me about six or seven years. The accelerator project was probably going to take me two or three years to complete, and um…and it’s much smaller. Although, it’s friends are in these crates. There are many of these experiments. This is actually [01:21:55:25] what’s called a critical assembly, and there are many of these little assemblies around here, you can see these lead blocks here. Well, this thing was fairly radioactive, but they, they, put their bodies up right in front of the lead blocks to protect certain parts of their bodies against the radioactivity. [01:22:12:13] So the lead walls are only a, you know, fairly low. The rest of their body you know, gets toasted, pretty well. 
 INTERVIEWER Amazing. Alright, so if you can, just while we’re here, can you tell me how this fits in, kind of with your outlook on, on art, and ultimately, back to, to Kryptos. I mean… 
 JIM SANBORN [01:22:37:06] Sure. When I started making sculpture, I, I did, I worked with something called, it was more or less a very simple kind of science. Um, I started off in the 1970’s and early ’80’s working with lodestones . 
 INTERVIEWER Mm-hmm. 
 JIM SANBORN [01:22:52:11] Uh, I don’t know if you know what lodestones are, but they’re naturally magnetized stones. And um, I worked with a scientist who told me where I might be able to get these things in Utah, and so I went out there and found an iron mine, that um, was getting ready to excavate an entire mountain of this stone, so on top of the mountain there were these large blocks of lodestone, large boulders of black metallic lodestone, everybody in the city of Cedar City said that this mountain was stuck repeatedly in lightening storms, and so every time it was struck by lightening, it gained magnetic power. So over thousands and millions of years, these lodestones became highly magnetized. And so I thought that was a fascinating thing, because what it was was basically it was just a rock, but it had these magical properties. You know, it could, could attract pieces of iron, you could make a compass for navigation out of it. There are some African tribes who use them as sacred objects, they have male and female lodestones, and actually one tribe in Africa made two large, a large gate out of lodestone, and so that when other tribal members walked up to the gate, it would pull the spears out of their hands. 
 INTERVIEWER Really. 
 JIM SANBORN [01:24:02:00] And take all the iron objects and stick them to the wall, so it was like the first metal detector. 
 INTERVIEWER [01:24:10:00] [LAUGHS] 
 JIM SANBORN [01:24:11:15] So anyway, I felt as if this just simple black stone that didn’t look interesting had this magical power, I thought that was a fascinating thing. It was like an invisible force. Ok? So I started working with invisible forces, like magnetic power of lodestones, the hidden force of the earth’s magnetic field. You don’t really see it. The coriolus force, that force in the earth that makes whirlpools and the northern and southern hemispheres spin opposite directions. And so I really liked that whole invisible, invisible, mysterious thing, and I set about trying to make [01:24:41:26] those invisible things visible. So in order to demonstrate the earth’s magnetic field, for example, I, I made a large array of compass needles, that were suspended by very fine monofiliment lines, maybe a hundred or two hundred of these needles in a large space, and you could see the, you could actually see the magnetic uh, attraction of the earth and which way is north and south, and then I could also deviate those compasses, with lodestones to properly placed, and things like this. So I carried on with that for a number of years, and then [01:25:10:21] um, I had also, I do a couple of different things. On the one hand, I do um, gallery and museum artwork. And on the other thing that I do is public art. Ok? So the public art projects I do are for cities, the US government, um, other governments, Universities, places like this. And these are projects where, where I put my art outdoors, and [01:25:40:11] um, it’s public, and I get paid to do that. The public artwork supports my gallery and museum work. So I do two different things. One makes actually the money to support the other. So a public project came up for the Central Intelligence Agency. [01:25:58:19] And um, I was chosen for that project on the one hand because I was from Washington DC, um, and on the other hand I had worked with invisible forces. Now, the invisible forces I’d worked with were generally natural forces of, of invisible forces, but they stretched the point a bit to think that I could work with the invisible forces of mankind, i.e. the Central Intelligence Agency, and espionage, and hidden secret material. In parallel to this, I was also fascinated with John LeCarre’s novels. [01:26:34:29] Tradecraft in general. Um, and secrecy. And so I did a tremendous amount of research, I don’t know, a tremendous amount, but six months of research, about cryptography, espionage, tradecraft, um, and things like this, in order to come up with the project for the CIA. Now, I knew at the time, and at least at that time, codes and encoding the last famous code was the enigma code. And codes and encoding was pretty esoteric stuff. It wasn’t like everybody knew about it. It wasn’t like the Da Vinci code had come out already, it was like, it was like nowhere. These people basically who were cryptographers were in small rooms in the middle of [01:27:14:26] you know, another room, in the basement of a building, you know, never to see the light of day. And so I somehow set about trying to change that. [01:27:26:16] And so I knew that encoding wasn’t necessarily the providence of the CIA, it was really an NSA thing, but most Americans, and most other people don’t know that. And didn’t know that at the time, and so you think secret agents, secret code, [01:27:40:27] it must be the CIA. You know? The NSA was more, in, at that time, in the nineteen eighties, it was more of a shadowy institution than the CIA was. So I decided to do a piece about cryptography, as a science, because it was a science like the other sciences I’d studied. Ok? It was basically, they made something visible invisible, [01:28:02:08] when they encoded it, and then they made it visible again, right down my alley. Ok, I really enjoyed that. So they were basically doing the kinds of things that I always liked to do. But I was challenged. Mathematically, completely mathematically challenged, had to be tutored in every, every year of high school in mathematics, and so therein lay the problem, how am I going to make this code that’s going to, hopefully going to remain un-deciphered for years, you know, potentially, and so I turned to a fellow, uh, named Ed Shythe [PH] um, who was formerly with the CIA, initially I’d entertained the ideas, [01:28:42:00] ok, who do I go to, I go to the Russians, do I go to the uh, the Mossad, um, who do I go to that would be really crack coders who would love to stump the CIA? Then I thought a little better than that and decided, ok, there must be somebody who was formerly with the agency, who would love to stump his previous employer? [INAUDIBLE] So I asked Ed to more or less give me a history of encoding practices, um, that kind of information now is just everywhere. There’s codebooks, you name it. We all have our own codes, we have our passcodes, all of this business, but then you didn’t have that stuff, so Ed and I met [01:29:23:13] at secret locations. Um, now this might seem ridiculous, these two guys really had to be secret about doing what we were doing, but in fact, there were at the agency at the time the CIA at the time, um, and still today there are divisions at the highest levels. There was one camp at the agency who really wanted this artwork project to happen. There was another camp at the agency that really didn’t want this artwork to happen, I mean, why do we want to spend a quarter of a million dollars on a piece of sculpture? [01:29:54:29] Well, William Webster, who was at DCI at the time, Director of Central Intelligence, determined that this might be a way for the agency to become more obvious, to improve it’s image, to become more transparent, or whatever, after a long period of clandestine problems and things like this, um, they decided to do that, and so um, we went ahead with the project. I chose to do a piece about encoding. I made a machette, which is a very perfect, three dimensional model of what I was going to do. And it was accepted, and they really liked, you know, the idea of my challenging the agency [01:30:38:07] and challenging everyone else who saw it to crack, crack the code. 
 INTERVIEWER You know, I think we’re…we just need a [INAUDIBLE] [BREAK IN AUDIO] 
 INTERVIEWER We should definitely look at what you submitted to them, as well. 
 JIM SANBORN [01:30:59:14] Yeah. 
 INTERVIEWER But I guess right now, we might have enough in the way of a tour? 
 JIM SANBORN [01:31:05:15] Well, I mean, I can walk, [OFF CAMERA COMMENTS] 
   
 [BREAK IN AUDIO] 
   
 [END OF TAPE KR101] 
 TAPE KR 102 [OFF CAMERA COMMENTS] 
 INTERVIEWER So first one’s very easy. Just tell me who you are. 
 JIM SANBORN [02:00:44:08] Uh, I’m Jim Sanborn. Uh, sculptor, infamous for Kryptos, uh, the Langley encrypted sculpture that I did. And um, what else? From Washington DC. Born and Raised in Washington DC? Went to school in Brooklyn, Pratt Institute, and uh… 
 INTERVIEWER No, good. Asked and answered. 
 JIM SANBORN [02:01:13:22] Ok. 
 INTERVIEWER Well, let’s just start with Kryptos, since that’s where we’re ultimately headed, but what was your goal with Kryptos? 
 JIM SANBORN [02:01:21:22] I think every artist’s goal should be to hold the attention of the viewer they’re making it for for as long as humanly possible. Mystery retained in a work means the work lives for as long as the mystery’s retained. Whether it’s a painting, whether it’s a sculpture, whatever it is, and so I wanted to do a piece for CIA that would be memorable, um, a challenge, and um, hopefully hold up over a period of time. That was basically it. In, in some small way, I mean, I was, I'm a product of a government family, my dad worked for the government, Library of Congress, I was always banging around in institutional green hallways. You know, in DC government offices. And I was taken out on a tour to the CIA uh, a site visit, and I went, walked through the agency, and it was all like an institutional green hallways, and you think, man, you’d think these guys would really want to be in a better environment than this, you know? Maybe their thinking would be inspired or changed some way. So I decided to take the commission because I felt as if I might be able to make some sort of difference, not to make the agency necessarily look like a better agency, [02:02:40:22] but maybe give the people at the agency some measure of um, an intellectual pursuit outside of their ordinary intellectual pursuits. Um, that might have a little levity involved, but it would still be challenging, and so, um, but then again, I also [02:03:00:13] I also designed it in such a way that the general public would find it interesting, or challenging as well, so it wasn’t only done for the agency, I mean, it was called public art, and it sits in the middle of the most unpublic governmental agency that we have, practically, um, so I had to make something that went beyond that, you know, the campus of the CIA. 
 INTERVIEWER Sure. When you say, um, mystery, when you say that this is, were you trying to [02:03:31:16] actually encapsulate kind of what this agency was about in this sculpture? 
 JIM SANBORN [02:03:40:01] Well, you know, I might have mentioned that encoding and decoding isn’t the provenance of the, necessarily the CIA, it’s more of an NSA thing, but I think in the, in the, in popular culture, people seem to associate it with the CIA. You haven’t seen a whole lot of movies about the NSA. 
 INTERVIEWER Right. Right. 
 JIM SANBORN [02:03:58:02] You really haven't. So the CIA is really it, and so, internationally, and so um, I basically put on, piled on to them some elements of other agencies, but none the less, I did it for them, and um, so you know, hopefully it went beyond them, and… 
 INTERVIEWER Sure. I mean, is that goal this kind of making, making your audience wonder, or making your audience, capture their attention for as long as you can, is that something that’s common with all of your work? Is that ultimately what you’re trying to do? 
 JIM SANBORN [02:04:39:12] Well, I think every, I think every artist does something to, something like that, but um, I, I want my pieces to work, which means, you know, if you go into a room with them, and, I mean, I did this installation about atomic time, at the, at the Corchran Gallery, and [02:04:59:09] there were people that walked into my installation a the Corchran and said, said to each other, oh, this is the electric room, this isn’t, this isn’t the exhibition. We, it’s someplace else, you know? And then I had people go into that same room, [02:05:09:26] and, and chills came over them and the hair on the back of their neck stood up, and they knew exactly what it was all about, like instantly, and were, you know, blown away by it. So I can, you can never play to both you know, all, all the audiences. All you can do is do the best you can. Um, and I'm, I was always hoping and it’s every artist’s hope that whatever thrills me will thrill a larger group. And so um, I’d like, I think of myself maybe as more [02:05:38:29], I had something of a childlike interest in things that wow me. And hopefully I make things that wow other people. Um, I'm a minimalist on the one hand, but at the same time, hopefully in that minimalism there is, there is an intellectual aspect of it that would, would make you go beyond what you see visually there. There is some content, and the content of my work often is more important than the physical manifestation of it. You know? I feel more like a, a nonfiction artist, ok? And you know, in, because I'm depicting things which are real, generally, they’re not just fictional fabrications from my mind, I, I'm not an abstractionist that closes my eyes and comes up with a form. It’s inspired by real events, real things in time, and all [02:06:35:14] of that, and so um, and I think the reality aspect of work does have resonance with people, [INAUDIBLE] for obvious reasons of popular culture and all the reality shows you have now, but… 
 INTERVIEWER Sure. 
 JIM SANBORN [02:06:50:17] Real stuff is better than, you know, fake stuff. And so that’s why I'm going real with everything I do. 
 INTERVIEWER Sure. When it comes to, take me back to the initial genesis of it. You, how did you get this commission? 
 JIM SANBORN [02:07:05:17] Well, I was selected for two reasons. One was that I was the local boy. Ok, it was, it was a national competition. I had been going after commissions from the general services administration for a number of years, and um, had, I don't think I’d, this is the first one I got. And I was selected partially because I was local, and also because I had worked with invisible forces. Albeit the invisible forces of nature. 
 INTERVIEWER Wait, wait. You’d worked with invisible forces. That sounds very grandiose. 
 JIM SANBORN [02:07:33:28] Yeah, I mean, invisible, I say, I worked, like through the nineteen eighties, I worked with lodestones, compasses, the earth’s magnetic field, the coriolus force, where, the force that controls whirlpools, in the northern and southern hemispheres. These were natural forces that were invisible. I mean, the wind is invisible until it hits something, but it’s still an invisible force, and so those kinds of things fascinated me, and I went, I set about to try to make those things visible for people. Right? To illuminate the subject in some way. 
 INTERVIEWER So make the invisible forces of nature, whatever they may be… 
 JIM SANBORN [02:08:04:06] Yeah, visible. Use, using either many hundreds of compasses to show you where the earth’s magnetic field was. Um, I made a whirlpool, and um, about the coriolus force. And um, I did various installations around the country in museums and galleries about these kinds of invisible forces. 
 INTERVIEWER Ok. So how does that make you qualified to… 
 JIM SANBORN [02:08:33:03] It doesn’t. I, uh, the jurors stretched the point of um, invisible and secrecy, and the fact that maybe I could work with a secrets of mankind, rather than the secrets of nature. And it seemed like a stretch, although I think I might have mentioned to someone that I enjoyed reading John LeCarre, was interested in tradecraft, and things like that. Um, and so I was, I was awarded the commission, and then worked for six months doing research about the kinds of pieces that I’d want to do for the agency, and then came up with a machette, or a model of the piece, for them to review, and they ok’d it, and then I moved on from there. 
 INTERVIEWER Ok. Ok. And so how does this theme of yours then visible, making the invisible visible fit in with this project? 
 JIM SANBORN [02:09:22:22] Well… 
 INTERVIEWER Whatever stretch you need to make. 
 JIM SANBORN [02:09:24:12] Yeah, exactly. Well, my interest in science, again, I went back, in the, in the Kryptos piece, one of the, one of the very early sections of Kryptos, which has already been decoded is basically a paragraph written by Howard Carter, in his notebook, um, when he discovered King Tut’s Tomb. And it was a word for word, I borrowed word for word his comments about you know, you know, what can you see? I see wonderful things. You know, a camera, the, the candle flame flickered with the exhaling of the, of the ancient uh, mist that came out of the hole when he dug through to see inside King Tut’s Tomb for the first time. And that moment of discovery, or when you walk down a beach and find a, a shark’s tooth, you know, or see a, an arrowhead lying on the ground, or some discovery, it’s discovery of something, these things were all invisible to you until you found them. You know, an archeologist digs things up that were invisible. Um, we discover things. And that moment of discovery is, is exciting, as a kid, you just go bananas when you find something or see something you never saw before. So for me, code was like that. You know? If there’s a secret and you, you want to make something secret, you hide it in a code, and then if you find it, you feel exhilarated. It’s like, the discovery of, even adding two plus two equals four. It’s, it’s magical to a younger person, and it can still be magical to an older person, too, hopefully. So basically I chose to use code. Um, also the site where Kryptos is was formerly a wooded hillside. 
 INTERVIEWER Hmm. 
 JIM SANBORN [02:11:00:14] And um, much, much loved by the agency employees, who could look at this hill, wood, wooded hillside from their cafeteria. The agency. Now, my work was placed in front of this window. Well, they had to build a new building, on this wooded hillside, and they had to get rid of all those trees. Well, there was a [02:11:20:05] huge stink about it at the agency, and finally, they had to go out there in the middle of the night and cut them all down or move them so that the next morning they were just not there anymore. So as a nod to the, as a nod to that forest, um, that disappearing forest, at the agency, I used the petrified tree to anchor one side of the [02:11:36:28] Kryptos screen. I wanted to use a code, and code generally, um, I like pencil and paper codes. Codes which can be written out in pencil and paper, this kind of thing. There are many ways of encoding. You can do it digitally, you can do it mathematically, um, you can do it many ways, and I'm an artist, also, um, was less enthused about the algorithmic possibilities. Because there are a lot of algorithms and mathematical formula which can be used for encoding systems. None of those I could do, because I couldn’t pass mathematics even one year in high school. So um, but, but being an artist and working with visual things, I was able to do an encoding system which for me was easy. I mean, the Navaho codebreakers worked on one of the most difficult codes ever devised because their language was completely cryptic to anyone’s way of speaking. 
 INTERVIEWER Sure, but to them it was easy. 
 JIM SANBORN [02:12:32:04] To them it was easy. Uh, it was easy for me to work on a code the way that I worked on it. Now, I did get help from a cryptographer at the agency, um, who gave me more or less an overview of codes, and then showed me different systems. Those systems, though, that he gave me, I could modify any way I wanted to modify them. Change them, use them or not use them, augment to, augment them, you know, whatever. Um, so it isn’t necessarily true that he could decipher what I’ve written either. Um, you know, I did, I did learn enough to know that compartmentalization and secrecy is a very important thing, so the fewer people know the answer, to anything, the better, and that’s sort of the way I went about it. So um… 
 INTERVIEWER No, that’s great. You can stop there. So describe the sculpture for me. It’s granite, it’s wood, as you say, petrified wood. 
 JIM SANBORN [02:13:29:06] Petrified wood, yeah. 
 INTERVIEWER It’s copper. 
 JIM SANBORN [02:13:33:01] Right. Well, imagine flying over the agency in a helicopter, and the agency basically, the site, I, I was given the whole agency as a site, and I could choose where I wanted to work. So I noticed that if you were to fly over, there was a courtyard in the middle of the agency, it’s surrounded by buildings. And then the entrance to the new building, which I was being commissioned for, um, you know, there was an outside to the entrance. And so basically you walk from the outside through the main entrance, through an atrium space, and you can walk down [02:14:04:00] into the courtyard. Well, I wanted the outside piece, because I wanted to do the piece outside the entrance to relate to the one on the inside. 
 INTERVIEWER Mm-hmm. 
 JIM SANBORN [02:14:11:14] So imagine flying over this CIA agency, and you look down on the ground, and you see, like you would see from an airplane out west someplace, you see a stone outcropping. There’s a line of stones, jagged stones coming up out of the ground. And those lines are parallel to each other from the air. So basically what I did at the agency was one, one element is in front of the agency, and it looks like a natural stone outcropping coming out of the ground, it’s granite, it’s on the left side as you walk in and on the right side. You walk between this outcropping of stone. And if you go up in your helicopter, and you look over on the inside, there’s the same outcropping on the inside, all lined up. So it appears as if the agency was built on top of that. And had been there way before the agency, been there for millennia. I like that idea, because it made it appear as if what I had done was there predated the agency, it was like a temple site, you know, some sort of a, religious temple site where secrets were always [02:15:06:08] there, and they just kept piling it on, you know, like they built, well, let’s build our new one on top of here, and then we’ll build our new one on top of that one, right? And so in, in the stratas of granite, in the front of the building, uh, I inserted between some of the stratas a thick piece of copper plate. Like an ore, between slabs of stone. Or a page, pages of a book. 
 INTERVIEWER Ok. 
 JIM SANBORN [02:15:27:12] And that ore, that copper plate was perforated with Morse code. The simplest code. And so when you walk into the agency, you walk past and around the simplest coding systems. And a lot of these naval intelligence guys could walk right up and say, oh, read it right out, it’s Morse code, it’s simple. 
 INTERVIEWER So what’s it say? 
 JIM SANBORN [02:15:45:27] Uh, I don’t remember. 
 INTERVIEWER [LAUGHS] Ok. 
 JIM SANBORN [02:15:50:11] I really don’t. I mean, honestly, I separate myself from these… 
 INTERVIEWER But it must have meant a lot to you at the time, when you put it there. 
 JIM SANBORN Yeah. But it, it is a primer of things to come inside. 
 INTERVIEWER Ok. 
 JIM SANBORN [02:16:00:24] Ok? 
 INTERVIEWER Ok. 
 JIM SANBORN [02:16:00:24] So, and then also outside, there is a lodestone, and a compass dial. There is a compass dial there, and the compass dial is not pointed to, it’s not oriented north and south. It’s offset. 
 INTERVIEWER Towards that… 
 JIM SANBORN [02:16:14:08] Now why is that? 
 INTERVIEWER So a lodestone is a rock that’s magnetized, right? 
 JIM SANBORN [02:16:16:26] Yeah, right. So why is that? I mean, why is the compass offset, what’s going on, there’s a mystery there. A mystery. So we have the Morse code, and we have the lodestone and the mysterious compass dial. That’s good, that’s mysterious, that’s weird, and we’ll go beyond, you know, we’ll think about that after we go inside. 
 INTERVIEWER Hmm. SO then once you go inside, there are two elements there, there is a, another granite outcropping, very similar to the one out front, that has another slab of copper in it, and a pool of water with fish, coy, plantings, benches, a very contemplative space. And then off to the side, there is a Kryptos sculpture, um, and it’s basically a copper screen, ten feet high, and twenty six feet long, and it’s serpentine. And the screen itself is perforated with letters. If you look at the screen from one side, uh, the left side of the piece is a, just a jumble of letters. It’s rows and rows and rows of letters in no particular form. On the right side of the piece, on the other side, there is a chart. For encoding and decoding messages. It was designed in the fifteen, sixteenth century by a French diplomat called Vigenere . 
 JIM SANBORN [02:17:25:09] And his tableau, Vigenere ’s, Vigenere ’s tableau was used to decode and encode messages. So I took Vigenere ’s tableau, as a historical moment in time, um, and a key, key to decrypt some of the other parts of the code. The left side is a series of paragraphs that are encoded in different systems. Vigenere ’s tableau can be used to decode por, portions of that left hand side, those portions have already been deciphered. I thought they’d take weeks, they took years. But they probably took somebody weeks, but nobody ever did anything about it. You know, so they’ve been pretty much cracked. There’s still one section down at the bottom about a, roughly a hundred characters that have not been deciphered. 
 INTERVIEWER Because they’re not using that Vigenere code? 
 JIM SANBORN [02:18:11:06] They use a different system. I mean, it, I, I use different systems all the way along. And um, some of the simplest systems for me were substitutions and matrixes, matrix codes, which use no, uh, necessarily, [COUGHS] no mathematics, but they were easy for me to do. Um, and I, when I encoded it, actually, I was, I did the decoding and encoding in order to be away from people, I, when I went to get the petrified tree that’s supporting one side of the screen, I rented a truck in Arizona and drove the truck, drove the tree back. And so I actually encoded it on that trip. With nobody else around in the truck. And so [02:18:46:28] basically I'm sitting there driving with this encoding chart, you know, in front of me. Really, very distracted driver, trying to figure out this, so there could be a few mistakes. 
 INTERVIEWER [LAUGHS] Great. 
 JIM SANBORN [02:18:56:21] And then I wrote, wrote it one way, and then I rewrote it and wrote it a different way. I was originally going to collaborate with a fiction writer, you know, to do the plain text, but then I decided, nah, that’s somebody else who knows what it says. I’ll know the weak link. You know, somebody else with loose lips. 
 INTERVIEWER Sure. 
 JIM SANBORN [02:19:16:03] So I didn’t want to deal with that, and so I basically wrote the whole thing myself, except for the Howard Carter piece which I included. And um… 
 INTERVIEWER How did you determine what you wanted to say? How, how, how kind of important is the message, versus the techniques, versus the aesthetics of the sculpture? 
 JIM SANBORN [02:19:38:07] Well, it all goes together. I mean, you have the aesthetics of the sculpture, which are relatively representational. The copper screen is a serpentine form that’s sort of emanating from this wooden tree. 
 INTERVIEWER Big S. 
 JIM SANBORN [02:19:47:25] It’s like a big S curve. Now, that would, if it was coming, like, if that piece of paper was coming out of a machine, a decoding, encoding decoding machine, it would sort of spiral out like in an S shape. 
 INTERVIEWER Ok. 
 JIM SANBORN [02:20:01:29] Paper was originally made from trees, petrified tree alludes to that tree paper idea. It also, the petrified tree is also uh, the remnant of the forest that was removed by the agency to build the new building. 
 INTERVIEWER Mm-hmm. 
 JIM SANBORN [02:20:14:11] And the Kryptos sculpture surrounds a tree great that was formerly supposed to have a small new tree planted in it, but we didn’t plant it, so now there’s a pool of water there instead. 
 INTERVIEWER Hmm. 
 JIM SANBORN [02:20:24:13] So there were several different layers of reasons of why I did what I did and where I did it. Um, so the screen itself, and the tree and all of that ensemble has a certain visual beauty to it, hopefully. Um, but then I wanted this other mysterious part to emote over a long period of time. And so basically I designed the code to enfold, [CLEARS THROAT] you know, to enfold, or unfold slowly… 
 INTERVIEWER Unfold. 
 JIM SANBORN [02:20:54:07] Like, you know, peeling layers off an onion. You come to the next, you come to the next, you come to the next. And it was also just inspired by my parents, who for years had scavenger hunts as parties, at their house. My father was a museum director, and a lot of their friends were like people who had studied Egyptology, and various other things, and so they’d have scavenger hunts at the house, and they’d hide things all over the neighborhood, and they’d all go out in teams and find stuff. And so I really liked that idea too, and so basically what I wrote in there was [02:21:23:18] more or less sort of part scavenger hunt, because it does have longitude and latitude coordinates, the plain text refers to something I might have left out at the agency. Um, it refers to a lot of different things that are outside, it’s just basically I wrote something that was as open to conjecture as humanly possible. I didn’t want to pin myself down, I didn’t want to pin the sculpture down, I didn’t want to typecast it in some way. I just wanted to leave it wide open. And that aspect of the sculpture has been what has made it succeed so well, because so many people have completely disparate you know, um, personalities, work ethics, races, genders, everything, have, have gotten something else out of it. And are, you know, always working on it, trying to crack what it says, even after it’s been cracked, there are other people that say, well, that’s not really what it says, even after I said it was, this is what it says. Oh, is it, really, ok. And I get these decrypts. I get these [02:22:23:27] multipage, twelve to fifteen page decryptions of Kryptos, that are completely off the wall. [CLEARS THROAT] But it still, it’s fascinating, it’s amazing that you know, people are doing that, and from what I understand also it’s become a [02:22:37:20] tool to help people who have brain injuries, and there are people using the sculpture to try to reconnect neurological pathways. Uh, by trying to crack the code, and things like that. And I thought that was, that was good. So… 
 INTERVIEWER I mean, so that’s, that’s all an artist can ask for, I would think. Is that people can look at it and think different things. 
 JIM SANBORN [02:22:57:10] Yeah, absolutely. 
 INTERVIEWER Now, we were talk…sure. We were talking kind of about that. I mean, you’re, you want there to be this mysterious element to your art. I think all artists do. Um, but at the same time, many, dare I say most artists might want to be able to walk up to a painting, look at, and want their subjects to, want their audience to walk up to a painting, look at it and say, uh, wow, that’s what they’re trying to say. You’re really trying to [02:23:38:00] evoke the opposite here. You almost don’t want people to know what you’re trying to say. 
 JIM SANBORN [02:23:41:09] Well, I, I’ll tell you, most painters don’t want it, don’t want that one response. 
 INTERVIEWER Not necessarily one response. 
 JIM SANBORN [02:23:44:16] Because what happens, let’s just say that that painting’s hanging in a museum, and then somebody sells it, and it ends up over somebody’s couch. Well, you don’t want to go into that room every day and look at that painting and seen that been there done that thing. Right? You want to look at that painting, get something new out of it every day. 
 INTERVIEWE R Hmm. 
 JIM SANBORN [02:24:07:04] And granted, that painting’s not in code, but it’s in sort of a visual code. Hopefully the color, the design, the gesture, whatever’s in there makes it look different every day, in different sunlights, you know, different lights, natural, artificial, whatever. So that way it retains that mystery for a long period of time. 
 INTERVIEWER Sure. 
 JIM SANBORN [02:24:22:17] So I'm just doing the same thing, it’s just puffed up a bit with other content elements. And… 
 INTERVIEWER Now, when this gets cracked, could, could Kryptos still have that same effect? 
 JIM SANBORN [02:24:39:06] Well, sure, because I, I, what I wrote is open to conjecture. I mean, I [CLEARS THROAT] I didn’t want to make it, I didn’t want to make what I wrote so simplistic that once you had the answer, that’s it, and you walk away and forget about it. 
 INTERVIEWER Right. 
 JIM SANBORN [02:24:52:04] Right. So it’s not, it’s not completely deciphered when it’s uncoded. 
 INTERVIEWER Gotcha. So once it’s, what is the source of that? What is the, what is your message here? 
 JIM SANBORN [02:25:10:14] Uh… 
 INTERVIEWER Let’s do, let’s do it this way. So so far… 
 JIM SANBORN [02:25:12:14] Permanent mystery. 
 INTERVIEWER Permanent mystery is the… 
 JIM SANBORN [02:25:19:21] I would love to have it be a permanent mystery. An enduring mystery would be good. Right. Some mysteries have endured for thousands of years. And that’s just fine. 
 INTERVIEWER You don’t want this to get cracked. 
 JIM SANBORN [02:25:30:27] Not really, no. 
 INTERVIEWER Because the actual cracking is what the purpose of the sculpture is. 
 JIM SANBORN [02:25:38:02] Yeah, the, it retains, as long as it’s not cracked or retains a mystery, that’s not to say it’s all going to be plain as day when it’s cracked, but it does um, it sure, it enhances it. It adds another layer. 
 INTERVIEWER At the same time, it’s taken a lot longer than you ever thought. 
 JIM SANBORN [02:26:00:05] Yeah, it has, and I, you know, well, there are lots of reasons for that. I mean, ok, so imagine that you work for the Central Intelligence Agency, and something, somebody plops something in your front, your front yard. As a challenge for you to figure out. Ok? Now, you’re the Central Intelligence Agency. Right? You’re supposed to be very intelligent. Everybody there is intelligent, right? [02:26:22:20] You don’t have anything pulled over your eyes. 
 INTERVIEWER Well, we sure hope so. 
 JIM SANBORN [02:26:24:10] You see everything clearly, ok? So this person didn’t dump something in our front yard we didn’t know what it said, we knew what it said from the very beginning. At least that’s what they’d like to say. 
 INTERVIEWER Right. 
 JIM SANBORN [02:26:34:29] And that’s what they would admit the world, to the world, that that’s what they say. We also wouldn’t be, we wouldn’t want to be caught dead trying to crack it. It’s too peripheral. 
 INTERVIEWER They’ve got more important things to do, right? 
 JIM SANBORN [02:26:41:26] We have far more important things to do than to crack that code, right? So they would do everything they possibly could to sort of divorce themselves from it and sort of let it, you know, bake away on it’s own, but there were certainly people at the agency, and when I went out there months after I’d done it, there was a group, a whole group of I think students of cryptography with pencil and paper, trying to figure it out, on tables arrayed around the sculpture. Which to me was brilliant. I thought it was really great that they were doing it that way, that you know, that’s what I had hoped for, was, the thing I hoped for, that it would be somehow an educational tool for the insider people, and would not necessarily be taken seriously, but on the other hand, [02:27:33:26] it did have a seriousness about it, in that nobody’s been able to figure it out, and it retains the mystery that CIA has always wanted to retain itself, you know, it’s kept secrets better than the agency has. 
 INTERVIEWER Yeah, I think it raise…[LAUGHS] exactly. 
 JIM SANBORN [02:27:48:03] Certainly. So… 
 INTERVIEWER Yeah, I think when, you know, you think of this, you think two things about, you know, what do you think, what does it make you think about the CIA? On the one hand, it’s, you know, we need to get some new agents in there, or the other, give them the benefit of the doubt, they've got better things to do. 
 JIM SANBORN [02:28:03:10] Right, they’ve got better things to do. 
 INTERVIEWER I like to think it’s the latter, but I don’t know. [LAUGHS] 
 JIM SANBORN [02:28:08:09] Well nobody knows. But I wouldn’t, if I was at the agency, admit either way. 
 INTERVIEWER Sure. 
 JIM SANBORN [02:28:14:23] You know, and so if somebody, if somebody in California says, oh, listen, I’ve cracked the code, then someone at the agency is certainly going to say, oh, we cracked that months ago. Which is exactly what happened. So. You know, 1999, after all those years, somebody said, oh, I cracked the code independently, then the agency is going to have to send somebody out there, Mr. Stein, and say, oh, did this months ago. Which they did, which is about the, as low a key thing as they could do about the whole affair, and I, I mean, personally, I think they’ve had a tremendous amount of tolerance, because I was speaking to those people the other day, and they were saying the Kryptos website, I mean, they used to get, you know, five or ten emails, or inquiries about Kryptos. Now they get like twenty or thirty thousand, thirty thousand a day. In just dealing with that, you know, it’s like a, it’s like embarrassing that government resources are having to field questions about Kryptos, but there are lot, lots of Kryptos websites now, so it’s all become confused, more, so there are probably other people other than the agency who know more about it than the agency does now. 
 INTERVIEWER Sure. But how much, I was going to get to this later, but while we’re there, how much can the public really know about Kryptos if they're not there on the site? I mean, is it possible for someone that’s not on site to actually crack it? 
 JIM SANBORN [02:29:34:15] Well, it’s certainly the most documented, it’s what, it’s the most documented sculpture, I think in history, except for David, or you know, the, some Leonardo images. Um, because it’s just um, we are in the tech, age of technology, and I know that the um, the Kryptos, and the, the documentation of Kryptos that took place in 1990, ’91, right after the dedication ceremony was really for, I know the news networks, the first time they had ever been allowed in. And so all the news networks scrambled to get tape, to get tape and get footage inside the agency, and this was the big window. And I think was one of the reasons the agency did it. In, part of their open door policy. Say, ok, we’ll let you all in. So everybody called me up and everybody wanted me to go out there and do a stand up and you know, do the whole thing, and [02:30:24:03] um, so I did, it did sort of that purpose, and it did open up the agency to a degree. You know, all the dedication ceremony was only, you had, you had covert operatives way off to one side, cordoned off, and then you had overt operatives over at another side, you know, more visible, and there were no invitations. 
 INTERVIEWER Hm. It’s amazing. Sure. [OFF CAMERA COMMENTS] 
 [BREAK IN AUDIO] 
 [END OF TAPE KR 102] 
 [OFF CAMERA COMMENTS] 
 INTERVIEWER I actually want to, I want to just keep going with the how surprised were you, how surprised are you that it’s still out there, that it’s still kind of making headlines, like people don’t know, or that you know, every small little… 
 JIM SANBORN [03:00:52:07] Yeah, people hanging on every tiny little chad, there, right? 
 INTERVIEWER Yeah, there you go. 
 JIM SANBORN [03:00:55:14] Um, I, yeah, I am surprised, and I am surprised, but on the other hand, I’ll tell you frankly, when I did the CIA piece, I’d been doing public art projects for maybe ten years before that. And um, I’d never put so much into a project before for so little money. I mean, it was a lot of money at the time, but I put a lot into it. I mean, I could have done much less, for the agency, than I did. 
 INTERVIEWER Right. 
 JIM SANBORN [03:01:22:09] But I felt as if maybe this is the time and place to put a lot into it, and this is the piece where I won’t make anything from it, but it will certainly be better, good for the resume, and potentially, you know, the publicity would be good, and whatever, so I put a tremendous amount into it, more than I would, for any other, and it took me, you know, years to do the piece, and so um, I did feel as if the, the site would have resonance that other pieces wouldn’t and so that’s why. Um, but none the less, I mean, I do [03:01:52:27] who would have known that you know, getting picked up you know, being, having Dan Brown as a fan or whatever, would have happened, um, that and before that, finding out that there were these fan clubs and websites and all of this stuff that I knew nothing, I knew nothing about these websites that had been in existence for years. Because I didn’t, I mean, I didn’t deal with the internet for a long time, not until recently. 
 INTERVIEWER Right. 
 JIM SANBORN [03:02:16:07] And so there’s this whole other world, this whole cult following of Kryptos, that I knew nothing about, and, and it was really, it was flattering, you know, it was very flattering, and it was pretty nice, because I, I didn’t know it had, I didn’t realize it meant so much to a lot of people. 
 INTERVIEWER What is it about that sculpture that you think draws this cult following? 
 JIM SANBORN [03:02:35:14] Well, I don’t know. I hate, I hate to say it, but I mean it’s like the, you know, it’s um, it’s a little like the Beautiful Mind syndrome. I mean, some of these people that get involved in, in Kryptos get, go way overboard with it, and um, they’re just, their lives are wrecked by it. I mean, they just, they become totally obsessed with it. And um, the problem is is there’s a whole group of people, and there are, I think a lot of people if you’re confronted with a, with a series of rows of meaning, quote meaningless roman numerals, or characters, or whatever, you start seeing patterns in it. 
 INTERVIEWER That’s kind of human nature, right, find patterns… 
 JIM SANBORN [03:03:19:00] You start finding, here’s a word over here, here’s a word over here, this goes together, this goes together, this goes together. And it’s an OCD, I think. I mean, there are different levels of this OCD, but, and some people have it mildly, some people have it you know, otherwise, but um… 
 INTERVIEWER Do you have it? 
 JIM SANBORN [03:03:32:10] And I hate to say, well, oh, um, yeah, and so, on some level. Um, but at the same time, all artists, I think, are, are dwelling on the edge of madness, and I, you know, some of my best ideas are when I'm the most anxiety ridden, depressed person that I know, but during those periods, it clears your head out, and allows you to think clearly, ok, because you’ve gotten rid of everything else. All the good things are gone, so [03:04:02:02] you might as well, you know, something else will come up. 
 INTERVIEWER Right. 
 JIM SANBORN [03:04:05:16] And so basically, um, it’s, it’s appealed to a lot of people with a lot of problems, and um, it’s given them something to do when they wouldn’t have had anything to do, perhaps. People have made entire careers out of it. Um, people have made a lot more money at it than I have. 
 INTERVIEWER [LAUGHS] 
 JIM SANBORN [03:04:24:02] Um, and I think it’s great, because it’s gotten a life of it’s own. You know, it sort of keeps on going, it’s become a juggernaut, and I, I'm not about to stop it or get in the way of it. Um, but I think it’s great. 
 INTERVIEWER What did you need to learn about cryptography to be able to stump the world’s best cryptoanalyzers. 
 JIM SANBORN [03:04:45:16] Well, I might have mentioned that I had to be tutored… 
 INTERVIEWER Right. 
 JIM SANBORN [03:04:46:21] In high school. Every year of high school in mathematics, because I couldn’t do it at all. The worst part of mathematics were algorithms, and I couldn’t do them. 
 INTERVIEWER Ok, so it wasn’t math. 
 JIM SANBORN [03:04:57:05] I think partially it’s because I'm a very impatient person. And a lot of these things require a very cool head. I mean, mathematics in general requires literally a temperature in your head that’s very cool. I'm very hot headed, and impulsive, and um, not relaxed, and I think it takes some very clear thinking to sort through a lot of algorithmic problems, and to see things in cryptography. [03:05:25:10] Since I didn’t have that ability, um, but I wanted to know about it, and I, I for some reason chose this way about, you know, way to make my art, I um, contacted um, Ed Scheidt , who was formerly with the agency. I didn’t want anybody at the agency now, I didn’t really want anybody connected. [03:05:45:04] They could be connected peripherally, but I, you know, I would have preferred to go to the Russians, you know, Israelis, go to Mossad, or somebody else, but I didn’t. And um… 
 INTERVIEWER Alright, so barring KGB, barring Mossad, you went to…Ed Scheidt … 
 JIM SANBORN [03:05:58:25] Ed Scheidt . And so Ed and I talked on the phone, and then we met at um, undisclosed locations. And uh, restaurants and things like this… 
 INTERVIEWER That sounds very cryptic too. Just… 
 JIM SANBORN [03:06:13:16] Well, we had to because there, you know, there is this division in the higher el, the higher levels at CIA that I might have mentioned, that you know, some people really wanted the project to go ahead, some people really didn’t want the project to go ahead. Nobody wanted a project which they, nobody wanted a sculpture in the courtyard that they didn’t know what it said. Ok? [03:06:29:25] And then there’s the issue of the NSA competition. So there were people at the NSA that heard that CIA was getting a big encoded sculpture, and what kind of coup would that be for the cryptofreaks to have NSA crack it before the CIA cracked it? So there was this big competition between these agencies. And much bigger than I thought it was at the time, I’ve only heard about this in the last couple of years. So Ed and I had to be very discreet. And people were caught trying to look into my building, and film, you know, through the windows of my studio in Washington. 
 INTERVIEWER [LAUGHS]. 
 JIM SANBORN [03:07:01:06] When I was building it, so… 
 INTERVIEWER So this is serious stuff. 
 JIM SANBORN [03:07:04:17] Yeah, it was very, it became very serious stuff to us, I mean, it’s silly, but serious, and so um, so he, I asked Ed more or less to give me an overview um, an outline overview of the history of cryptography, and what kinds of systems can you use? What are the weirdest ones, what are the, you know, the simplest ones, what are the most complicated ones? So he gave me a lot of different ways of doing it, and as an artist, I, I chose methods that I could do without necessarily having to use mathematics, and that’s not to say I didn’t. 
 INTERVIEWER Mm-hmm. 
 JIM SANBORN [03:07:40:13] Um, but, the, and so the parts that have been deciphered already use fairly simple systems. They were layered, and they used matrixes. 
 INTERVIEWER Matrixes. 
 JIM SANBORN [03:07:48:04] A matrix is a um, I have some, I have some decoding charts on the table, I’ll show you later, um, and I can demonstrate how it’s done. Um, but those kinds of systems were fairly easy, and I, and I did learn that if did, if I made some mistakes, that was a good thing, because it made it harder to decipher. 
 INTERVIEWER Huh. 
 JIM SANBORN [03:08:09:10] And I also knew I couldn’t keep secrets, and so as I was doing it, I tried, as soon as I did it, I tried everything I could just to forget about it. And put all my papers away and put everything away and hid it away in safes and whatever, so I wouldn’t know what it said, either. Otherwise I’d blurb it out, at some point. And then the hardest thing is just making sure that at every interview, I don’t drop some clue that I didn’t mean to leave there. So… 
 INTERVIEWER Feel free to do that. By the way. 
 JIM SANBORN [03:08:37:01] No problem. And um, so uh, so Ed gave me these various, you know, possibilities, ways of doing, history and systems, and things like this, and then I could take those systems and change them and modify them, um, any way I wanted to. Um, so they’d suit my purposes, and also to try to ensure that he wouldn’t necessarily know what it says. Um, he probably, he might have the best shot at knowing what it says, of anybody, but none the less, I did have the ability to modify things. So um, and that’s the way it was left, and he gave me these things, and I, indebted to him for that information. 
 INTERVIEWER So then, and then you were off to your own devices, then. 
 JIM SANBORN [03:09:14:28] Yeah, so I just, I cut these things out, um, they were things that I did at the last minute, um, you know, the things that happen unintentionally, I mean, recently, in the last few months, I realized that there was an error, there was an error found in the decoded section, that had been there for years, it was 1999 when it was decoded, and I realized it was a mistake in it just a few months ago… 
 INTERVIEWER And that’s because you tried to forget these things. Or… 
 JIM SANBORN [03:09:46:04] I try to forget about it, and not, not pay attention to it, because I didn’t really want to know, I didn’t want to be part of it, so I wouldn’t divulge something, and so um, ignorance is bliss, and so um, anyway, so I found this thing, and I felt as if these people needed everything they could, clue wise, to figure out what was going on, and so I, I, I leaked it, that it was a problem. So. 
 INTERVIEWER With one of your biggest fans. 
 JIM SANBORN [03:10:11:12] Yeah, with Elonka , and, and Elonka and I have become good friends in this whole, in this whole process, and um, you know, she helps me and I help her, and that’s fine. Symbiotic… 
 INTERVIEWER Right. 
 JIM SANBORN [03:10:25:29] Relationship. 
 INTERVIEWER I mean, she’s someone that, that, she has other things that she’s doing, but this is certainly kind of taken over her life… 
 JIM SANBORN [03:10:36:01] Well, somebody’s got to know more about it than I do, because I don’t know that much about it, so I mean, frankly, she knows more than I do about it, that’s great. Somebody, then somebody can be a spokesperson for me [INAUDIBLE]… 
 INTERVIEWER That’s good. Um, I'm just going to keep moving down, that’s great. I, so one, there’s four layers, we know that there’s four layers now, and we know that three to use the onion analogy, have been peeled away. 
 JIM SANBORN [03:10:59:00] Mm-hmm. 
 INTERVIEWER Why have those been cracked and there’s still this fourth layer? 
 JIM SANBORN [03:11:02:13] Well, I mean… 
 INTERVIEWER It’s intentionally harder to crack? 
 JIM SANBORN [03:11:09:09] Yeah, they all got a little bit harder as they went along. Yeah. 
 INTERVIEWER Just shaking your head. 
 JIM SANBORN [03:11:14:10] That’s all I'm going to say. 
 INTERVIEWER [LAUGHS] What…is there something about the first three that lead you to… 
 JIM SANBORN [03:11:26:19] That I, now, that I can’t say for sure. That I’ll never say. Maybe, maybe not. 
 INTERVIEWER But you know the answer. 
 JIM SANBORN [03:11:33:11] Oh, I know the answer. Yep. I know the answer, and I’ve also entrusted a…you get into a tricky thing here. I mean, I, I’ve had many people try to crack this thing, and sent me emails and phone calls, and you know, things like this, and uh, I'm always gleeful to disappoint them. Um, but uh, 
 INTERVIEWER I mean, you have a lot of people that you’d be letting down, if you divulged the code right now, wouldn't you? 
 JIM SANBORN [03:11:58:21] Well, I, I guess. 
 INTERVIEWER All those people that have spent their lives trying to crack it, you can’t just give it away with a simple answer. 
 JIM SANBORN [03:12:07:01] Yeah, exactly. Exactly. It’s built up a history with it, and so that’s a good thing. But um, yeah, anyway. 
 INTERVIEWER No, so um, as far as this, this fourth layer, obviously that’s where everyone’s interest is, that’s where, where they’re looking. The codes before, to dip back into kind of what you needed to know to do this, were based on these famous codes in history. 
 JIM SANBORN [03:12:33:29] Hmm. 
 INTERVIEWER In a way. Substitution, Caesar ciphers… 
 JIM SANBORN [03:12:37:08] Yeah. 
 INTERVIEWER 
 Vig eneres … 
 JIM SANBORN 
 [03:12:40:16] Right. 
 INTERVIEWER Is it safe to say that this next round is also based on, it’s not a new system, system of coding? 
 JIM SANBORN [03:12:51:19] I don’t know, I can’t make a comment on that. 
 INTERVIEWER Right. Of course, alright, well, talk to me about the other three layers, then. I'm going to read it here. Between the subtle shading and the absence of light lies the nuance of illusion. [03:13:08:08] That was cracked 1999. Is that, is that correct? 
 JIM SANBORN [03:13:10:02] Yeah. 
 INTERVIEWER So what does that mean? 
 JIM SANBORN [03:13:18:09] Well, you heard of the Hour of the Wolf? It was a Bergman movie years ago called the Hour of the Wolf, and the Hour of the Wolf happens between four am and six am, and it’s that weird time when most people are probably almost fallen asleep, and the other ones haven’t awakened yet, and it’s this weird couple of hours that are like, in, it’s not, it’s beyond subtle shading, and darkness, it’s this weird little twilight situation, and um, that’s where you like to play around, and that’s where I like to play around, and that’s where the Kryptos sculpture’s playing around. 
 INTERVIEWER Gotcha. So…Based on maybe when the sun comes up and hits it a certain… 
 JIM SANBORN [03:13:57:20] Yeah, but it’s about light and shadow. Um, it, going, referring back to Ed Scheidt ’s coding systems, there are systems, there were systems where there were, there were encoding systems in past history which were involved with um, shading of light and shadow and all of this, and um, you can do a painting of a house, for example, and in the shadow of the house is some encoded message. Just in the shape of the shadow or whatever. 
 INTERVIEWER Gotcha. So just sticking with the light and shadow versus visible, invisible. 
 JIM SANBORN [03:14:30:00] Yeah, right. Right. 
 INTERVIEWER Gotcha. So it doesn’t necessarily need to lead you somewhere else. It, it could be it’s own part of the sculpture. 
 JIM SANBORN [03:14:41:16] Yeah. 
 INTERVIEWER I, I, I don’t know if I'm asking this right, but there’s the sculpture itself, there’s the beauty of it, there’ s the granite and the copper and the confluence, then there’s the text, which is also interesting, and then there’s what it actually says, and what it actually means, and some of it just by getting that sentence is, they’ve cracked part of this code, but then there is also this additional layer, which, those are your words? I mean, those are your, your thoughts? 
 JIM SANBORN [03:15:08:29] Yeah, I mean, I wrote all of that stuff. Now, I mean, you know, it’s all open to interpretation, you know, the more the better. I love to disabuse, I mean, use disinformation as well as the best of them at the agency. 
 INTERVIEWER Great. 
 JIM SANBORN [03:15:27:25] So I mean, it’s, you know, that kind of stuff is important to me. And, and sending people down blind alleys is, uh, part of the game, isn’t it. 
 INTERVIEWER So I’ll be cautious of what you tell us right now, of course. 
 JIM SANBORN [03:15:38:13] Right. 
 INTERVIEWER So then there’s also the, the coordinates. Why coordinates? So this is the second layer now. Right? There are some… 
 JIM SANBORN [03:15:47:18] Well, I mean, I car, I carried out the, I mean, I carried out the piece, I mean, I did the piece on a specific location. Um, and um, in the process of doing it, you know, I was, I was all over that site, I mean, at the agency, because I did pieces outside, and I did pieces inside. And um, I did, and I told this already to Elonka ’s group, and you know, there, right out there on the agency, not very far from one of my artworks is a benchmark, a geological longitude and latitude coordinate point that was established by satellite. At least, that was what I was told at the time. 
 INTERVIEWER Right. 
 JIM SANBORN [03:16:25:24] And so that gave me a very close you know, it gave me, it gave me a location marker, before GP, everybody had a handheld GPS. I mean, we didn’t have that stuff in ’88, so at least, I didn’t have it. And um, so it gave me a, a way to locate things that I could have done out there at the agency. And as I said, I was out there for a long time, I had a lot of equipment out there, and I did a lot of stuff out there. I do know that at, at night, um, teams were sent out at the agency to neutron x-ray the ground around everything that was built there. And the building walls and everything to try to detect bugs or anything that somebody put in there. 
 INTERVIEWER That’s right up your alley too. 
 JIM SANBORN [03:17:10:07] Huh? 
 INTERVIEWER That’s right up your alley, too. 
 JIM SANBORN [03:17:13:19] Yeah, so I mean, you know, it’s all sorts of things that, I mean, there are things still none the less, I mean, no, no system’s perfect, and um, you know…I did allude to something I possibly could have done there. 
 INTERVIEWER Yeah. Elonka ’s convinced you’ve buried. Something. 
 JIM SANBORN [03:17:31:00] Mm-hmm. 
 INTERVIEWER Harking back to your uh, treasure hunt days with your parents, perhaps. 
 JIM SANBORN [03:17:32:23] Yeah, right. 
 INTERVIEWER See, he stiffens up in his chair, when…then King Tut. Carter’s description. Is this just something that you’ve seized on because you like it? Is this going back to your, this is one of those moments where, you know, a moment in history, or, what, what are your thoughts there? In terms of dedicating a decent chunk of code to something that’s been written before? 
 JIM SANBORN [03:17:58:00] Well, to me it was, to me it was, let’s see, that was in ’87, ’85 I went to Egypt, ’80, ’77 I went to Egypt, I've been to Egypt a couple of times. Um, my initial love was archeology. Um, and Howard Carter’s King Tut’s Tomb was to me really just mesmerizing discoveries, and moments in time. And significantly historical. And um, typified that moment where, that aha moment where you discover something, that same aha moment that is, that happened when these people cracked these parts of Kryptos. So yeah, to me, it was another layer of, just another thing that seemed germane to the subject, and um, but would also in addition steer people in lots of other, myriad of directions, historically, you know, in ways to, just other places, the masons, and all this stuff, they used all these kinds of imagery. Um, and that’s good. So I just piled him on. 
 INTERVIEWER Mm-hmm. 
 JIM SANBORN [03:19:07:24] Spicing it. 
 INTERVIEWER Spicing it. To a, a unified purpose, or are these all separate elements that live on their own? 
 JIM SANBORN [03:19:14:19] I can’t tell you. 
 INTERVIEWER [LAUGHS] But one thing that seems to be, one thing that’s striking to… 
 JIM SANBORN [03:19:24:25] What’s the passcode to your uh, ATM, what’s your ATM code, anyway? Come on, come on? 
 INTERVIEWER Quite, quite obvious. Yeah. 
 JIM SANBORN [03:19:28:00] Thank you very much. 
 INTERVIEWER Fair enough, fair enough, fair enough. So one thing that sounds kind of very, very interesting is you’re, it seems, you talked earlier about this exhilarating moment of discovery. This is something that it seems that you’re happy to be able to impart on people as they unpeel these layers. 
 JIM SANBORN [03:19:56:08] Absolutely. I think it’s, I mean, I think it, it should be, frankly, it should be a way of life, because I think that’s what creativity is about. You know, turning over a stone and seeing a salamander to me, I mean, it, you know, is, is, you know, can be an exciting thing and an interesting thing, um, and it gives you, it gives me joy, and you know, frankly, I like as much of that around as possible. I think everybody needs to get more of that. And so [03:20:17:20] it’s also a fairly benign way to get a high. And um, that’s important these days. 
 INTERVIEWER [03:20:28:28] That’s great. That’s really good, man. That’s great. [MUMBLES] So, along those note—along those lines then...it is safe to assume that the code is crackable. 
 JIM SANBORN [03:20:46:25] It’s crackable. Yep, and it’s, uh, does say something. 
 INTERVIEWER It does say something, it is crackable, it’s worth continuing to look for the answer— 
 JIM SANBORN Oh, absolutely. Absolutely, I mean it, uh, you know... 
 INTERVIEWER [03:20:59:08] And I asked you this before, yeah, so it’s well-documented, that could be the answer, so it—it’s crackable...anyone could potentially do it, and you don’t need to have special security clearance to get this answer? 
 JIM SANBORN [03:21:11:05] Oh, I don’t know, I can’t say that either. 
 INTERVIEWER You need to be at Langley to get the answer? 
 JIM SANBORN [MUMBLES] Well, I mean I’m not gonna say anything about that. 
 INTERVIEWER [LAUGHS] 
 JIM SANBORN [03:21:18:13] Um...you know, I mean, I— So many people have sent me cracks of Kryptos, I’m, uh, I brought that up before and, you know, there are people who were determined that say that their decode of Kryptos is the right one and it doesn’t matter what Sanborn says. 
 INTERVIEWER Right. 
 JIM SANBORN [03:21:36:02] I mean there are people, I’ve gotten five or six of these things...voluminous documents about what Kryptos says and they, they, they find this is the solution to Kryptos, this is absolutely the solution to Kryptos, they send it to the New York Times , they send it to the Washington Post and CNN and everybody else and, you know, they want this all announced, this is the solution, and frankly if I said it wasn’t it wouldn’t make any difference to these people. You know, and that’s a little scary too, it’s a little bit about identity theft, you know. 
 INTERVIEWER Right— 
 JIM SANBORN [03:22:04:09] If you think about that, I worry about that, there’s probably— If I want—let’s just say I wanna keep Kryptos...to myself and uncracked for as long as I live, right? 
 INTERVIEWER Sure. 
 JIM SANBORN [03:22:15:09] That means I’m never gonna tell anybody what it says. So, if somebody, I mean unless they, unless they tell me first what it says, okay. So let’s just somebody comes along and says, this is the solution to Kryptos. This is it. And I say no it’s not, he says well that’s just your opinion. I mean you tell me what it says then. I said I won’t tell you. Hey. 
 INTERVIEWER [03:22:37:11] Right. 
 JIM SANBORN So, I mean it— Amazingly, there are quite a few of those people around and quite a few people have attempted that. 
 INTERVIEWER [03:22:44:03] Sure. What would be the...to what end? 
 JIM SANBORN I have no idea. There—uh, you know, in order to increase their...visibility on the network or something. I couldn’t think—I don’t know. 
 INTERVIEWER [03:22:56:18] ‘Cause so far, you have divulged when the code has been correctly interpreted— 
 JIM SANBORN Oh yeah. And will continue to do so. I have an—I have—I— Some of these people are also very proprietary about what they’ve written and they only want...they only want Jim Sanborn to read it. 
 INTERVIEWER Hmm. 
 JIM SANBORN [03:23:13:18] Nobody else. Because if they did get it right, then they’ve given it to somebody else, it’s as almost as if [sic] they—they’re convinced they have the lottery ticket. And if I tell you give me my lottery ticket or I tell you what it is— 
 INTERVIEWER [INAUDIBLE] 
 JIM SANBORN [03:23:25:10] —then you’re gonna go cash it. So these people call me and says, I’ve got the solution. I said okay, read it to me, how do I know you’re Jim Sanborn. 
 INTERVIEWER You called me— 
 JIM SANBORN [03:23:34:15] It gets into this whole ridiculous thing—you called me, right? [LAUGHTER] It gets into this whole ridiculous thing, so now finally I’ve entrusted a—a test, to my girlfriend, and they, they can call—they call her, and they have to line up their code, in a line of roughly 100 letters. [03:23:53:21] And line up their 100 letters, you know, with no spaces or anything and then, put a line under that, let—number it, like 1 through 100, so each letter corresponds to a number. And then Jay will ask them, well, what character you, you have for number 6. [03:24:07:08] What character do you have for number 22. What character do you have for 35. And if those aren’t the right ones, then that goes no further. And nobody knows what it says, but it took me months to figure that system out. 
 INTERVIEWER [03:24:19:11] [LAUGHS] I was gonna say— 
 JIM SANBORN Right, just how to figure out how to do that without having them have to tell me what it says, or anyone else. So. 
 INTERVIEWER [03:24:28:13] What was it like when, I mean what...what was it like when the first three layers were cracked, when Jim Boo—uh, Booglie [PH] said, hey. 
 JIM SANBORN [03:24:37:04] I think it’s great. I was really happy. I mean I said thank goodness somebody finally, I mean, you know, somebody’s really working on it, you know. And, uh, I thought it was great, I really did. 
 INTERVIEWER Did it— 
 JIM SANBORN [03:24:47:24] Except they were a little bit wrong, but— 
 INTERVIEWER They were a little bit wrong. Still a little bit wrong? 
 JIM SANBORN No, no, no— 
 INTERVIEWER No— 
 JIM SANBORN [03:24:52:18] —I straightened that out. 
 INTERVIEWER Right. Oh, right, right, but you didn’t realize it was wrong until recently. 
 JIM SANBORN Yeah. 
 INTERVIEWER [03:24:58:21] So...is there... Do you have any issues with the computer versus the pencil and paper thing...you know, is, is—did you intend it to be done kind of at a desk with a pencil and paper or do you want like, computer programs to actually...plow through this thing— 
 JIM SANBORN [03:25:14:24] It can be done in any way, all’s fair in love and cryptography. 
 INTERVIEWER That’s good. 
 JIM SANBORN You know? I mean, just as... 
 INTERVIEWER Sure. 
 JIM SANBORN [03:25:22:27] —can’t, uh...any tools anybody wants to use, throw at it, that’s good. Somebody’s gonna give over some super-computer time that’s fine. 
 INTERVIEWER [LAUGHS] So you’re the only person that knows this. 
 JIM SANBORN [03:25:34:24] I believe so. 
 INTERVIEWER [PAUSE] You did divulge some secrets early on, right? There’s the—there’s [UNCLEAR] about you walking into a—was it the archives? To make sure that this thing was clean— 
 JIM SANBORN [03:25:47:25] Yeah-yeah-yeah-yeah-yeah. 
 INTERVIEWER Tell— 
 JIM SANBORN That was pretty funny. 
 INTERVIEWER Tell me about— 
 [OFF CAMERA COMMENTS] 
 JIM SANBORN [03:25:54:17] Yeah. Um— [CLEARS THROAT] Yeah, when I—I first started this out, I mean, you know, when I told the agency, when I, when I submitted my maquette [PH]...and I said this section’s gonna be encoded, and I really don’t want anybody to know what it says ever. [03:26:08:14] And he says well, you know, we’re gonna have to know whether it’s pornographic or, you know, anti-agency or something, I mean, you know, you can’t do that to us, you know. You know, artist’s reputation for being, whatever. 
 INTERVIEWER Right. [LAUGHS] 
 JIM SANBORN [03:26:21:27] And, um... 
 INTERVIEWER And you’re— 
 JIM SANBORN So— 
 INTERVIEWER —nothing’s easy about your first— 
 JIM SANBORN [03:26:24:06] —I said—I said, okay, so what do you want me to do, they said, well, tell you what. We’ll entrust—if you would entrust the code to the Department of Historical Intelligence, that would be—satisfy us. I said yeah, right, I give it to them then it’s like all over the entire agency in five minutes, so... [03:26:40:05] So basically, the Department of Historical Intelligence was in this windowless room at the agency, it’s three people. A guy and two girl—and two women. And so— 
 INTERVIEWER That’s the department. 
 JIM SANBORN [03:26:50:01] Yeah. And so I was supposed to give it to them, so I made out three pieces of paper, I took the Kryptos plain text, and I wrote it out on—I wrote it out on a page, then I cut the page up into, you know, two or three sentences or whatever, and then scrambled them all, and then recut them again into three pieces. [03:27:10:23] So that you could, if you read your piece, you could determine that what I had written was not either of the two things that that guy had thought might be, either pornographic or anti-agency, right. You could read that and realize that that’s not what, what it really said. [03:27:26:24] On your one little piece. And each—so, if I gave one piece to each of these people, that’s three pieces, they’d have the whole code sitting in front of them, um, but I didn’t let them sit together so they could put ‘em all together. 
 INTERVIEWER So each person had a piece— 
 JIM SANBORN [03:27:42:03] Each person had a piece, so they were supposed to read their piece then I’d collect the pieces and leave the room. And so they could compare notes or whatever, you know, but, they still wouldn’t get the whole thing, they—you know, unless—unless they had an institutional memory. Unless they had a photographic memory. [03:27:56:17] And then at least one of them, or maybe two of ‘em, if they—two of ‘em had photographic memories, then I’d be in trouble maybe. 
 INTERVIEWER Right. 
 JIM SANBORN [03:28:04:10] So what I did is I...in addition to making three, I made two, in case one of the people did have a photographic memory. I didn’t imagine two would have a photographic memory, so, I took three pieces of paper and I took two pieces of paper into the room. So I walk into the room, and I said, um, okay, listen, this thing’s really important, and, uh, I don’t want you—any of you guys, you know, I—and this is really important. [03:28:28:10] So I wanna entrust this with the person of the best memory. And two of them pointed immediately to the third person, who—she’s, she’s got a photographic memory, she’s amazing, she’ll—just give it to her. Okay, I asked her to leave the room. 
 INTERVIEWER Ha-ha-ha— 
 JIM SANBORN [03:28:41:19] So she—I got her outta there. And so then I gave the two pieces to the two people remaining. And then kinda put ‘em at edge, because then it was even more responsibility for the two of them. And so they were both reading their, their passages, and then, the woman who was there, um, started physically shaking. [03:29:00:02] And then finally became hysterical, and, and said she can’t do it, and she left her piece of paper on the table and said I can’t do it and they—she had to be escorted outta the room. 
 INTERVIEWER Because of what it said? 
 JIM SANBORN [03:29:15:21] [PAUSE, SIGHS] The upshot was that I— about a week later, two weeks later, three weeks later I got a, a note from, from the Department of Historical Intelligence stating that, they could not accept the responsibility, for the Kryptos code. Because, what if I duped those people individually. 
 INTERVIEWER [03:29:37:14] Mmm. I see. 
 JIM SANBORN And they read this, and it was wrong, but they read it...they’d lose their jobs. 
 INTERVIEWER Gotcha. 
 JIM SANBORN [03:29:47:13] So they couldn’t do it, so, then it was basically down to, I, I basically made a deal with William Webster, who was the DCI at the time, Director of Central Intelligence, and I told him that I—I did find some paper pulp. Um, the agency pulps their documents at the end of the day, the ones they don’t want, and they put ‘em down a chute and then it goes into a big hammermill where it’s ground up into paper pulp. 
 INTERVIEWER Mmm. 
 JIM SANBORN [03:30:14:05] And I wanted to use some of that material for my artwork. So I wanted access to it, so I made a deal with the—I’ll tell you what, I’ll give you, I’ll give you the code for—in exchange for...this pulp material. And he said okay. So at the dedication ceremony I gave William Webster a—a sealed envelope that had, like, you know, your basic old wax seals on it, you know, and in the inside of it I had—it was foil or something so he couldn’t see through it...whatever. 
 INTERVIEWER Sure. 
 JIM SANBORN [03:30:46:07] But I didn’t put it all in there. They didn’t know that, and, here I am at the dedication ceremony, I’m giving it to Webster...you know, and then, I give it to him and he winks at me... 
 INTERVIEWER Ah— 
 JIM SANBORN [03:30:57:22] You know, and I wink back, you know, and I give it to him and I get the paper pulp, and, but, he didn’t really get the whole banana there. 
 INTERVIEWER Ah— 
 JIM SANBORN [03:31:05:13] So, but they couldn’t very well say...I duped ‘em, could they. They couldn’t very well say, well, this guy pulled one over on us. So it was over. So that’s the way it stays. But he— 
 INTERVIEWER He’s not happy with it— 
 JIM SANBORN [03:31:18:22] —he did have part of it. And then he was on “Face the Nation” about a year after, two years after he res—he, um, he left the agency. And they asked him, somebody at “Face the Nation” asked him, what’s the most difficult thing...uh, that you’ve had to keep secret, he says, that Kryptos sculpture in the courtyard. 
 INTERVIEWER [03:31:36:11] [LAUGHS] But he doesn’t even know it. 
 JIM SANBORN He didn’t know all of it, but he had part of it. 
 INTERVIEWER Does he have part four? 
 JIM SANBORN [03:31:43:03] I don’t—no, I don’t think so. Um, I don’t know that I gave him the whole thing, I think I might’ve given him...part—something associated with it, but— 
 INTERVIEWER Mmm. 
 JIM SANBORN —it would’ve still been very difficult to crack. And from what I understand, it is—they don’t know where it is. Nobody knows where the letter is. 
 INTERVIEWER [LAUGHS] Oh, man— 
 JIM SANBORN [03:32:01:03] So the letter’s gone missing. 
 INTERVIEWER Great. 
 [OFF CAMERA COMMENTS] 
 END KR 103 
   
 
 2007-07-24 - NOVA PBS - 
 HYPERLINK " https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YiYkfwVZuVY " https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YiYkfwVZuVY 
 Kryptos 
 PBS air date: July 24, 2007 
 NEIL DEGRASSE TYSON : Most good spy stories have a secret message, usually in code, but a master spy can always crack it. Today, code breaking involves complex mathematics and relies on powerful algorithms. But even with the best technology, there's one coded message no one has been able to crack. It's ten feet tall and sitting in plain view, in the backyard of the CIA. 
 Correspondent Cohen, Chad Cohen, is on the case. 
 CHAD COHEN : Of all the secrets hidden at the highly-secured CIA headquarters in Langley, Virginia, you may be looking at one of the strangest. Meet Kryptos. It's a copper monolith inscribed with nearly two thousand very random-looking characters, but there's a message here, if you can break the code. And despite countless attempts since Kryptos' 1989 installation, that has yet to be done. 
 JAMES SANBORN : Now, you're the Central Intelligence Agency, right? You're supposed to be very intelligent. Everybody there is intelligent, right? You don't have anything pulled over your eyes. 
 CHAD COHEN : Well that's at least what we all like to believe. But with Kryptos, that's exactly what Jim Sanborn has done. And he is not the world's most sophisticated cryptographer. In fact, Sanborn is not a cryptographer at all. The mastermind behind Kryptos is an artist, if an unconventional one. His workspace looks more science lab than art studio. 
 JAMES SANBORN : I worked with lodestones, compasses, the Earth's magnetic field, the Coriolis force. These were natural forces that were invisible. Those kinds of things fascinated me, and I set about to try to make those things visible for people. 
 CHAD COHEN : When the CIA was looking for a sculpture to grace the courtyard of their new headquarters building, Sanborn wanted to design something that would stay invisible, a secret code. So how does an artist craft a message that the best code breakers in the world can't crack? 
 ED SCHEIDT *(Former CIA Cryptologist): I set the codes out for him, which means he didn't have to know the mathematics of it. 
 CHAD COHEN : Sanborn found help in the former chairman of the CIA cryptographic center, Ed Scheidt, who gave Jim a crash course in Cryptography 101. 
 ED SCHEIDT : Well classical cryptography—and it's been defined this way—includes substitution and it includes transposition. 
 CHAD COHEN : For substitution, take one letter or word and swap it for another; transposition: keep the letters the same, just systematically mix them up. Pretty straightforward tricks and yet they've been stumping would-be code breakers for thousands of years. 
 Julius Caesar came up with a system based on substitution to send secret messages to his generals on the battlefield. It's called the Caesar cipher. 
 ED SCHEIDT : A letter is substituted with another letter. By laying two alphabets on top of each other, and shifting one of them over a set number of places, you get a whole new alphabet. 
 CHAD COHEN : The word "film" in this case, now becomes "ilop," complete gobbledygook if intercepted by any enemy. But if you know how many spaces to shift the alphabet over, it's clear as day. 
 The codes have gotten more complicated through the ages. Nazi Germany's enigma machine, for example, which Hitler used successfully for years before allied code breakers cracked it, employed a mechanical rotor system. Ultimately, it just created elaborate substitutions. 
 Transposition ciphers have their place in history too. To send secret messages to his army, General Ulysses S. Grant didn't substitute letters he just carefully mixed them all up. 
 Sanborn also employed this technique in Kryptos using pen and paper. 
 JAMES SANBORN : So this is the plain text, this is the way it's written out in English. 
 CHAD COHEN : By writing the message on a grid, and transposing it to different positions on a new grid, it becomes unreadable to someone trying to intercept it. And the more times you do it, the more complex it can get. 
 JAMES SANBORN : So it can get very complicated. 
 CHAD COHEN : Very quickly, it seems. 
 JAMES SANBORN : Very quickly. 
 CHAD COHEN : Complicated, maybe, to a code breaker, but it's very simple to the intended recipient. If the code is meant for you, you don't have to break it. Because when two parties want to communicate via cipher, they agree ahead of time on the specific rules of the system. With transposition, you might agree on how many rows you'd use or how many times the chart is flipped. With substitution, you might agree on how many spaces to offset the alphabet. 
 To make Kryptos, Sanborn took both these techniques, used them to encode four distinct messages, and cut them into copper. 
 JAMES SANBORN : Every letter was cut out with a jigsaw, and it took two and a half years of cutting to do it. 
 CHAD COHEN : Secure as the CIA may be, it wasn't long before Kryptos went mainstream. Through internet message boards, Web sites, hacker conventions, Kryptos has become a phenomenon. 
 ELONKA DUNIN : We have a group of about a thousand people around the world that are brainstorming this very, very heavily. 
 CHAD COHEN: ELONKA Dunin, whose Web site has had millions of hits from would-be crackers, is generally considered to be the leading Kryptos expert in the world, even Sanborn says so. But she's only seen the sculpture up close once. 
 ELONKA DUNIN : Well, because we can't get in to see Kryptos at CIA, because it's at the center of CIA. 
 CHAD COHEN : So, Elonka took me here, to the Hirshhorn Museum in Washington D.C. to see a similar Sanborn piece, called Antipodes. 
 ELONKA DUNIN : So, this is the next best thing. The order of the letters is identical. The punctuation is the same. Part one starts here, where it says, where it says "emufphz" decrypts to the letters "b, e, t, w, e, e, n." 
 CHAD COHEN : Between? Since when does "emufphz" resemble anything like the word "between?" Well, since Parts One, Two and Three of Kryptos were cracked in 1999. 
 JIM GILLOGLY *(Code Breaker): It all looks like pretty much garbage to the untrained eye. 
 CHAD COHEN : And here's the guy who did it, L.A. computer scientist Jim Gillogly. 
 JIM GILLOGLY : Part of the reason it's developed a cult following is that I was able to crack it and expose it to the world. So people are able to say, "Look, some of it really is solvable. It's not just a mass of garbage letters." 
 CHAD COHEN : Gillogly's programs combine algorithms with rules of thumb for English grammar and spelling. The computer tries millions of different character combinations and throws away the ones that look like nonsense. He's cracked many codes in his life, but he always starts the same way, with what's called a frequency count. 
 Simply put, he counts. He counts up all the letters in the text and sees how often each one occurs. That works because, in any language, certain letters always show up more often than others. Whether it's a cookbook, a flight manual, or a page from Hamlet, the frequency of each letter will always stay about the same. 
 So, in English, on average, of all the letters in any given bit of text, Es make up over 12 percent, while Qs occur much less frequently, less than .2 percent. 
 When Gillogly studied the first two parts of Kryptos, he noticed there were just as many Qs as there were Es. It was a tip-off that they were probably standing in for, or substituting for, more common letters. Gillogly ran his program on it. 
 Okay, so you typed this stuff in, you typed in that code, and, boom, this came out. 
 JIM GILLOGLY : This came out. 
 CHAD COHEN : But as the solution for Parts One and Two came out on Jim Gillogly's screen, the mystery just got deeper. 
 JIM GILLOGLY : "Between subtle shading and the absence of light, lies the nuance of illusion." 
 JAMES SANBORN : "It was totally invisible. How's that possible? They used the Earth's magnetic field. The information was gathered and transmitted underground to an unknown location." 
 JIM GILLOGLY : This was his last message. 
 CHAD COHEN : Hmm, another one to scratch your head on, right? 
 ELONKA DUNIN : Yes, there's a lot of "hmms" here, definitely. 
 CHAD COHEN : There was nothing to help reveal the meaning of the sculpture, just the ambiguous words of Jim Sanborn; not that it mattered to the man who actually cracked it. 
 JIM GILLOGLY : For myself, personally, I don't care quite so much about what was being hidden as how it was hidden. 
 CHAD COHEN : Gillogly quickly discovered that Part Three of Kryptos was hidden in a radically different way. This one had lots of E's and only one Q, just like it would be in English. 
 JIM GILLOGLY : I could tell that it was a transposition cipher because the frequency of the letters was identical to the frequency in English. 
 CHAD COHEN : Remember what Sanborn was doing in his studio? The transposition he did with that graph paper? Gillogly created a computer program that undid it, and eventually he cracked Part Three of Kryptos as well. 
 This section was recognizable, taken right out of archaeologist Howard Carter's notebook, describing the moment he first opened King Tut's tomb. 
 ELONKA DUNIN : "Slowly, slowly, desperately slowly, the remains of passage debris that encumbered the lower part of the doorway was removed." 
 JIM GILLOGLY : "And then, widening the hole, a little I inserted the candle and peered in. The hot air escaping from the chamber caused the flame to flicker, but presently details of the room within emerged from the mist." 
 CHAD COHEN : Diary excerpts from famous explorers, mysterious allusions to light and dark. Even when Sanborn's words are put in the right order, they are cryptic, to say the least. 
 Between "subtle shadings," and the Howard Carter, what does it mean? 
 ELONKA DUNIN : Well, they all tend to have a common theme of things hidden, things underground, things concealed from sight. So that theme may be something that is going to give us a clue towards Part Four. 
 CHAD COHEN : Part Four is made up of the final 98 letters on the sculpture, and only by breaking that last piece will the true message of Kryptos be revealed. But so far, it has proven impervious to all the techniques of would-be code breakers. 
 ELONKA DUNIN : Part Four is hard, well, number one, because it's very short. It's only 97 or 98 characters. When cryptanalysts are working on a code, we generally have a large amount of cipher text to work with. Then you're able to look for the very subtle mathematical patterns, which is what takes a code apart. 
 CHAD COHEN : Is it something really simple that people are missing? 
 JAMES SANBORN : No, I...maybe not...maybe, maybe not. 
 CHAD COHEN : And he may have had one more trick up his sleeve, something called concealment. 
 JIM GILLOGLY : It could be a matter of obfuscating the language before starting to encrypt. 
 ELONKA DUNIN: ED Scheidt has said that he used a little bit of concealment on Part Four, but we don't know what that means. 
 CHAD COHEN : A message can be concealed in various ways before enciphering it, to make it even harder to break. 
 ED SCHEIDT : The first challenge then is, well, what masking technique was used? 
 CHAD COHEN : Techniques like removing all the vowels first, or spelling the message phonetically, can radically undermine the code-breaking methods. So, it may still be a long time before anyone experiences the thrill of cracking all of Kryptos. Even Ed, who taught Jim how to make code, doesn't know the solution, which makes Jim Sanborn the only person on earth who does. And he isn't dropping any hints. 
 It wouldn't help to just kind of get it out there? 
 JAMES SANBORN : Unburden myself? 
 CHAD COHEN : Lighten your load? 
 JAMES SANBORN : Oh, no, no, no, no. Unh unh. I really like your program, but I'm sorry. 
 
 
 2007-07-30 - PBS Interview 
 Kryptos: Expert Q&A 
 https://www.pbs.org/wgbh/nova/article/sanborn-puzzle/ 
 On July 30, 2007, artist James Sanborn, mastermind behind the still-partly-unsolved Kryptos sculpture at CIA headquarters in Langley, Virginia, answered selected questions about Kryptos, including ones about the unsolved fourth part. 
 Q:What about cryptography interests you? Did you ever work with codes as a child? S.B., San Francisco, California 
 James Sanborn: I never worked with codes in my youth—I was mathematically illiterate. 
 Q:Of the natural materials you have used in your creations, which have you found to be the most interesting? Cathleen, Garden Grove, California 
 Sanborn: Lodestone and uranium 
 Q:What is your favorite kind of encryption, and why? Greg Bond, Los Angeles, California 
 Sanborn: Matrix codes (bar codes) are special. They are more "art-like." 
 Q:How many ways of cracking codes do you know? Zel, grade 4, Oregon 
 Sanborn: 50+ 
 Q:What was your inspiration in making Kryptos? Was it solely to stump would-be code-breakers, or was there another reason behind it? Melissa, Oregon 
 Sanborn: I was always fascinated with spies and the secret ways in which they communicated. I also wanted the artwork to retain a sense of mystery. 
 Q:Do those who don't have access to the CIA grounds have enough information to solve Kryptos? Andrew Bromage, Melbourne, Australia 
 Sanborn: Yes . 
 Q:Based upon the methodology of the partial solutions to Kryptos to date, do you still believe that further progress can be made as though by a single operator using "pen and paper" methods? Larry McElhiney, Indianapolis, Indiana 
 Sanborn: Anything is possible. 
 Q:Isn't one of the points of creating art letting the viewer determine how the piece affects, interacts with, or speaks to them individually? Why take on definitive pieces? Or would you consider the encryptions indeterminate? Melissa Cherry, Houston, Texas 
 Sanborn: My encryption phase ended 15 years ago. My art has since been varied, to say the least. 
 [Editor's note: To learn more about Jim Sanborn's artistic endeavors, see Elonka Dunin's page on the sculptor .] 
 Q:What is your next project? Craig Ivey, Madison, Alabama 
 Sanborn: I am recreating the particle accelerator that split the first atom of uranium in the United States. 
 Q:Are these puzzles fun to create, and why do you create them? Mary Vela, Gulf Breeze, Florida 
 Sanborn: At the time I did Kryptos, the codes were more fun. Now, they are hard. 
 [Editor's note: Sanborn chose to group together his answer to the following questions.] 
 Q:You have three people trapped in a room trying to crack K4, the yet-unsolved fourth segment of Kryptos. One is a mathematician, one is a geologist, and one is a historian. Who has the best chance at solving the last piece of the sculpture? Bryan Strader, Phoenix, Arizona 
 Q:If you could describe K4 geometrically, how many dimensions would it have and what shape would they be? Ron Novy, Covina, California 
 Q:Does the shape of the Kryptos serve any purpose in the encryption? Robert Brandon 
 Q:Will the solution to "K4" come out piece by piece, or will it all pop out at once? James Gaquin, San Diego, California 
 Q:Would it be possible to decrypt K4 without prior knowledge of K1, K2, and K3? John Willemse, Rotterdam, The Netherlands 
 Q:Could the underlying message of Kryptos be ascertained without decrypting part four? David, Lafayette, Louisiana 
 Sanborn: I have already given all of the clues that I want to give. 
 Q:You have said that as far as you know the last part has not been solved by anyone, publicly or privately. How do you feel about that? Gerald McMillen, Stamford, Connecticut 
 Sanborn: Smug . 
 Q:Does K4 have a solvable answer, or is it unsolvable—a sort of metaphor for the endless depths of human curiosity? Stephanie Daniel, Jackson, Mississippi 
 Sanborn: Yes, it has a solvable answer. And I hope it continues to be of interest to many. 
 Q:Are you willing to sell the answer to Kryptos? Anonymous 
 Sanborn: No ! 
 Q:Do you intend to reveal the solution at some point, or are you comfortable with taking the solution to your grave? Laura, Arkansas 
 Sanborn: The solution to Kryptos may outlive me. If so, arrangements have been made that will allow decryptions to be checked against the solution. 
 
 2009-04-20 - Wired 
 Mission Impossible: The Code Even the CIA Can't Crack 
 The sculpture named Kryptos at CIA headquarters contains a secret message — but not even the agency's brightest can crack its code. 
 THE MOST CELEBRATED inscription at the Central Intelligence Agency's headquarters in Langley, Virginia, used to be the biblical phrase chiseled into marble in the main lobby: "And ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free." But in recent years, another text has been the subject of intense scrutiny inside the Company and out: 865 characters of seeming gibberish, punched out of half-inch-thick copper in a courtyard. 
 It's part of a sculpture called Kryptos , created by DC artist James Sanborn. He got the commission in 1988, when the CIA was constructing a new building behind its original headquarters . The agency wanted an outdoor installation for the area between the two buildings, so a solicitation went out for a piece of public art that the general public would never see. Sanborn named his proposal after the Greek word for hidden . The work is a meditation on the nature of secrecy and the elusiveness of truth, its message written entirely in code. 
 Almost 20 years after its dedication, the text has yet to be fully deciphered. A bleary-eyed global community of self-styled cryptanalysts—along with some of the agency's own staffers—has seen three of its four sections solved, revealing evocative prose that only makes the puzzle more confusing. Still uncracked are the 97 characters of the fourth part (known as K4 in Kryptos -speak). And the longer the deadlock continues, the crazier people get. 
 Whether or not our top spooks intended it, the persistent opaqueness of *Kryptos *subversively embodies the nature of the CIA itself—and serves as a reminder of why secrecy and subterfuge so fascinate us. "The whole thing is about the power of secrecy," Sanborn tells me when I visit his studio, a barnlike structure on Jimmy Island in Chesapeake Bay (population: 2). He is 6'7", bearded, and looks a bit younger than his 63 years. Looming behind him is his latest work in progress, a 28-foot-high re-creation of the world's first particle accelerator, surrounded by some of the original hardware from the Manhattan Project. The atomic gear fits nicely with the thrust of Sanborn's oeuvre, which centers on what he calls invisible forces. 
 With Kryptos , Sanborn has made his strongest statement about what we don't see and can't know. "He designed a piece that would resonate with this workforce in particular," says Toni Hiley, who curates the employees-only CIA museum . Sanborn's ambitious work includes the 9-foot 11-inch-high main sculpture—an S-shaped wave of copper with cut-out letters, anchored by an 11-foot column of petrified wood —and huge pieces of granite abutting a low fountain . And although most of the installation resides in a space near the CIA cafeteria, where analysts and spies can enjoy it when they eat outside, Kryptos extends beyond the courtyard to the other side of the new building. There, copper plates near the entrance bear snippets of Morse code, and a naturally magnetized lodestone sits by a compass rose etched in granite. 
 
 The heart of the piece, though, is the encrypted text, scrambled, Sanborn says, by "a coding system that would unravel itself slowly over a period of time." 
 When he began the work, Sanborn knew very little about cryptography, so he reluctantly accepted the CIA's offer to work with Ed Scheidt , who had just retired as head of Langley's Cryptographic Center. Scheidt himself was serving two masters. "I was reminded of my need to preserve the agency's secrets," Scheidt says. " You know, don't tell him the current way of doing business. And don't create something that you cannot break—but at the same time, make it something that will last a while." 
 Scheidt schooled Sanborn in cryptographic techniques employed from the late 19th century until World War II, when field agents had to use pencil and paper to encode and decode their messages. (These days, of course, cryptography is all about rugged computer algorithms using long mathematical keys.) After experimenting with a range of techniques, including poly-alphabetic substitution, shifting matrices, and transposition, the two arrived at a form of old-school, artisanal cryptography that they felt would hold off code breakers long enough to generate some suspense. The solutions, however, were Sanborn's alone, and he did not share them with Scheidt. " I assumed the first three sections would be deciphered in a matter of weeks, perhaps months, " Sanborn says. Scheidt figured the whole puzzle would be solved in less than seven years. 
 During the two years of construction, there were moments of intrigue and paranoia, in keeping with the subject matter and the client. "We had to play a little on the clandestine side," says Scheidt, who talks of unnamed observers outside armed with long-range cameras and high-intensity microphones. "We had people with ladders climbing up the walls of my studio trying to photograph inside ," Sanborn says. He came to believe that factions within the CIA wanted to kill the project. There were unexplained obstacles. For instance, he says, " one day a big truckload of stone for the courtyard disappeared. Never found. I saw it in the evening, went back in the morning, and it had vanished. Nobody would tell me what happened to it. " 
 Sanborn finished the sculpture in time for a November 1990 dedication . The agency released the enciphered text, and a frenzy erupted in the crypto world as some of the best—and wackiest—cryptanalytic talent set to work. But it took them more than seven years, not the few months Sanborn had expected, to crack sections K1, K2, and K3. The first code breaker, a CIA employee named David Stein, spent 400 hours working by hand on his own time. Stein, who described the emergence of the first passage as a religious experience , revealed his partial solution to a packed auditorium at Langley in February 1998. But not a word was leaked to the press. Sixteen months later, Jim Gillogly , an LA-area cryptanalyst used a Pentium II computer and some custom software to crack the same three sections . When news of Gillogly's success broke, the CIA publicized Stein's earlier crack. 
 
 James Sanborn buried his sculpture's message so deeply that a CIA staffer took seven years to solve just the first three sections. Here's what we know. 
 
 The first section, K1, uses a modified Vigenère cipher. It's encrypted through substitution—each letter corresponds to another—and can be solved only with the alphabetic rows of letters on the right. The keywords, which help determine the substitutions, are KRYPTOS and PALIMPSEST. A misspelling—in this case IQLUSION—may be a clue to cracking K4. 
 
 K2, like the first section, was also encrypted using the alphabets on the right. One new trick Sanborn used, though, was to insert an X between some sentences, making it harder to crack the code by tabulating letter frequency. The keywords here are KRYPTOS and ABSCISSA. And there's another intriguing misspelling: UNDERGRUUND. 
 
 A different cryptographic technique was used for K3: transposition. All the letters are jumbled and can be deciphered only by uncovering the complex matrices and mathematics that determined their misplacement. Of course, there is a misspelling (DESPARATLY), and the last sentence (CAN YOU SEE ANYTHING?) is strangely bracketed by an X and a Q. 
 
 Sanborn intentionally made K4 much harder to crack, hinting that the plaintext itself is not standard English and would require a second level of cryptanalysis. Misspellings and other anomalies in previous sections may help. Some suspect that clues are present in other parts of the installation: the Morse code, the compass rose, or perhaps the adjacent fountain. 
 But if anyone expected that solving the first three sections would lead to a quick resolution of the whole puzzle, their hopes were soon dashed. The partial solutions only deepened the confusion. 
 K1 is a passage written by Sanborn. "I tried to make it sound good and be inscrutable enough to be interesting," he says. Judge for yourself how well he did: "Between subtle shading and the absence of light lies the nuance of iqlusion." Yes, iqlusion —one of several misspellings that Sanborn says are intentional. The second section reads like a telegraph transmission. There's a reference to a magnetic field and information transmitted to a specific latitude and longitude—geo-coordinates for a location a couple of hundred feet south of the sculpture itself (a spot where nothing of apparent interest lies). 
 K3 paraphrases a diary entry of anthropologist Howard Carter from his 1922 discovery of King Tut's tomb, ending with a question: "Can you see anything?" When Gillogly turned up that passage, he says, he had "the same excitement and exultation that Carter described. In a way, it seems that the plaintext is a metaphor for the work of the code breaker, or perhaps of the CIA itself." 
 THE 97 CHARACTERS of K4 remain impenetrable. They have become, as one would-be cracker calls it, the Everest of codes. Both Scheidt and Sanborn confirm that they intended the final segment to be the biggest challenge. There are endless theories about how to solve it. Is access to the sculpture required? Is the Morse code a clue? Every aspect of the project has come under electron-microscopic scrutiny, as thousands of people—hardcore cryptographers and amateur code breakers alike—have taken a whack at it. Some have gone off the deep end: A Michigan man abandoned his computer-software business to do construction so he'd have more time to work on it. Thirteen hundred members of a fanatical Yahoo group try to move the ball forward with everything from complex math to astrology. One typical *Kryptos *maniac is Randy Thompson, a 43-year-old physicist who has devoted three years to the problem. "I think I'm onto the solution," he says. "It could happen tomorrow, or it could take the rest of my life." Meanwhile, some of the seekers are getting tired. "I just want to see it solved," says Elonka Dunin , a 50-year-old St. Louis game developer who runs a clearinghouse site for *Kryptos *information and gossip. "I want it off my plate." 
 Making the effort more complicated is the fact that the puzzle maker is alive and, in theory at least, a potential resource. For years, there has been a delicate pas de deux between the artist and the rabid *Kryptos *community. Every word Sanborn utters is eagerly examined for hints. But they also have to wonder whether he's trying to help them or throw them off track. Scheidt says that this process parallels the work of the CIA: "The intelligence picture includes mirrors and obfuscation." 
 "It's not my intent to put out disinformation, " Sanborn says. " I'm a benevolent cryptographer. " Some think otherwise, and Sanborn occasionally receives messages from people enraged that he knows the secret and they don't. " It's the fact that I have some sort of power," he says. "You get stalkers. I don't know how they get my cell numbers and everything off the Internet, but they do. People have called me and said pretty terrible things. There are some who say I'm an agent of Satan because I have a secret I won't tell." 
 Though Sanborn's usual practice is to stay in the background, every so often he feels obliged to comment. In 2005, he refuted author Dan Brown's claim that the "WW" in the plaintext of K3 could be inverted to "MM," implying Mary Magdalene. (Brown included pieces of Kryptos on the book jacket of *The Da Vinci Code *and has hinted that his next novel will draw on the CIA sculpture, a prospect that deeply annoys Sanborn.) 
 Intentional or not, Sanborn's comments (or lack thereof) seem to generate an added layer of confusion. Even a straightforward question, like who besides him knows the solution, opens up new wormholes. The official story is that Sanborn shared the answer with only one person, the CIA director at the time, William Webster . Indeed, the decoded K3 text reads in part, "Who knows the exact location only ww." Sanborn has confirmed that these letters refer to Webster (not Mary Magdalene). And in 1999, Webster himself told The New York Times that the solution was " philosophical and obscure ." 
 But Sanborn also claims that the envelope he gave Webster didn't contain the complete answer . " Nobody has it all," he says. "I tricked them ." 
 So, Webster really doesn't know? 
 " No ," says Sanborn, who has taken measures to ensure that someone will be able to confirm a successful solution even after he dies. He adds that even he doesn't know the exact solution anymore. " If somebody tried to torture me, I couldn't tell them," he says. "I haven't looked at the plaintext of K4 in a long time, and I don't have a very good memory, so I don't really know what it says. " What does the CIA make of all this? "When it comes to the solution," says spokesperson Marie Harf, "those who need to know, know." 
 IF ANYONE MANAGES to solve the last cipher, that won't end the hunt for the ultimate truth about Kryptos . "There may be more to the puzzle than what you see," Scheidt says. "Just because you broke it doesn't mean you have the answer." All of this leads one to ask: Is there a solution? Sanborn insists there is—but he would be just as happy if no one ever discovered it. "In some ways, I'd rather die knowing it wasn't cracked," he says. "Once an artwork loses its mystery, it's lost a lot." 
 The day I visited Kryptos , a rare snowstorm in Virginia had blanketed the courtyard in white. I circled the sculpture carefully, marveling at the way the colors and texture of the surrounding landscape affected the panels, as some character strings became highlighted in white and other phrases shimmered, reflecting the dull light bouncing off the windows. I examined all the pieces, brushing aside the snow to uncover the Morse code and the compass rose. It was like unearthing hieroglyphs in some ancient ruin. Agents and bureaucrats shuffled past, deep in thought, clutching cups of coffee from the onsite Starbucks. In their midst, Jim Sanborn's statement in copper, wood, and granite remains, proof that even in the house of spies, some truths may never be found. 
 
 2009-05-18 - The Independent 
 'Kryptos' and Dan Brown: Inside the CIA's code of secrecy 
 Artist Jim Sanborn thought his 'Kryptos' cypher at the CIA headquarters would be broken within weeks. But two decades later, it still guards its text. David Usborne reports on a mystery that has frustrated the world's best crypto-geeks 
 Monday, 18 May 2009 
 Kryptos sculpture in Langley by artist Jim Sanborn, may feature in the next book by author Dan Brown 
 For 19 years it has sat beyond the public's gaze in an inner courtyard on the campus of the Central Intelligence Agency, a not uninteresting sculpture with 865, apparently randomly selected letters perforating a solid scroll of copper. But Kryptos is not merely a sculpture, and artist Jim Sanborn chose its constituent letters in a far from random fashion. They make up a code so complex that even the CIA's most esteemed cryptologists can't crack it. 
 Everyone at the CIA has known this for years. But when a novel called The Da Vinci Code appeared, a whole new crowd of crypto-geeks started paying attention. Today, the puzzle is the object of almost obsessive interest to thousands of amateur code-crackers worldwide. And the object of their obsession begins as follows: 'EMUFPHZLRFAXYUSDJKZLDKRNSHGNFIVJ'. Pardon? 
 " The whole thing is about the power of secrecy, " Mr Sanborn, 63, gaily explains in the new edition of Wired magazine. Presumably he is aware that secrecy and the CIA is a touchier subject than ever nowadays, with even the Speaker of the House of Representatives, Nancy Pelosi, accusing the agency last week of having lied to her about its use of waterboarding interrogation techniques during the Bush years. 
 But if the cultish notoriety of the 10ft-high sculpture, dedicated in the CIA's Langley, Virginia, headquarters in 1990, has been a mild irritant to the agency so far – the last of four parts of the riddle remains unsolved even today – matters might be about to get much worse. And Dan Brown, whose second book, Angels & Demons, crashed with knuckle-whitening impact on to our cinema screens this weekend, may once again be to blame. 
 Before a bestselling author stuck his oar in, Kryptos's life at Langley was rather quieter. It was seven long years from its 1990 unveiling before the first part of the four-section cypher was broken, a hiatus that astonished its creator: he had assumed that the all-powerful intelligence agency would crack his code within a matter of weeks. 
 The answer to that chunk took its first solver, a CIA employee called David Stein, 400 hours of his own time to break. The two lines of nonsense that started the code came out as "Between subtle shading and the absence of light lies the nuance of iqlusion" – the last word a deliberate misspelling of occlusion to further throw dedicated codebreakers off the scent. 
 The complexity of the puzzle is all the more remarkable considering that Sanborn knew little about the art of encryption before he started on the project. To help with the commission, the CIA loaned him a retiring cryptographer, Ed Scheidt. True to espionage form, mild paranoia crept in: Scheidt would meet Sanborn at secret locations where he taught him the basics of secret code writing as practised by European spies from the late 19th century through to the Second World War. (It would be best, Scheidt was quietly advised, if he refrained from teaching his protégé about the most up-to-date government techniques.) 
 As they progressed, however, Sanborn ensured that even Scheidt would not know the final answers. He took elaborate steps to make the task of cracking the message of the sculpture difficult. The plaintexts would contain deliberate misspellings – such as the "iqlusion" error – and additional clues were placed in Morse on other fragments of the sculpture scattered about campus away from the copper scroll itself. 
 All of those complications help explain why the last section of the code is now considered the Everest of the code-breaking world. Even with the help of a Pentium processor and a sophisticated cryptographic program, the amateur aficionado who broke the rest of the cipher, Jim Gillogly, could not solve its final mystery. The result is a puzzle that both stumps and delights its aficionados – and is ripe for exploitation by a conspiracy lover like Dan Brown. 
 Rumours abound that in the next, eagerly awaited, Brown novel, which will appear later this year, the Kryptos sculpture will make a grand appearance. Its title, The Lost Symbol – certainly suggest a coding connection. And Brown has been seen nosing around his nation's capital many times in recent years. 
 We know Kryptos has already captured Brown's imagination because of references to it on the Da Vinci Code cover, which includes a mention of its map coordinates at the CIA's HQ, as well as letters in mirror-writing which read: "Only WW knows". The same message is contained in the decoded version of one of the sculpture's four parts and is a reference to an acknowledgement by Sanborn that when he was finished he handed the final solution in an envelope to then CIA director, William Webster – WW. 
 The notion that Brown may exploit Kryptos for more stupendous financial gain (he is believed to have earned $250m from The Da Vinci Code) "deeply annoys" the artist, according to Wired. The last time that he said anything in public about the sculpture was in 2005, when he contradicted Brown's suggestion that "WW" could be inverted to say MM and was meant to spell Mary Magdalene, a mainstay of Brown's novels. 
 Nor will Sanborn thank Brown if he drags his sculpture into religious controversy. "I don't want my work manipulated in such a way that its meaning is somehow transformed," he said in an earlier press interview. 
 We still do not know for sure that Kryptos is about to undergo the Brown treatment. He and his American publisher, Doubleday, remain mute on the subject. But if so, you can assume the CIA itself won't be thrilled either. The spooks are about as likely to welcome the intrusion as the Vatican was. 
 Sanborn is also worried about a Brown-inspired Kryptos frenzy. Even now, there are people infuriated at him for refusing to give up the secret of the fourth text, which promises thereafter to unlock the entirety of his riddle. "It's the fact that I have some sort of power," he says. "You get stalkers. I don't know how they get my cell numbers. People have called me and said pretty terrible things. There are some who say I'm an agent of Satan because I have a secret and I won't tell. 
 "You don't do something for the CIA and expect it to go away and nobody ever hears about it again, " Sanborn said back in 2005. Little did he know. Even mere rumours of his work at Langley making the pages of the next Dan Brown novel is catapulting it into a spotlight brighter than any of his contemporaries could even dream of. Such a spotlight could lead to a renewed spurt of obsessive work on the code, and a solution; if not, Sanborn insists, he wouldn't much mind. " In some ways, I'd rather die knowing it wasn't cracked," he says. "Once an artwork loses its mystery, it's lost a lot." 
 Cracking the code: The key alphabets 
 EMUFPHZLRFAXYUSDJKZLDKRNSHGNFIVJYQTQUXQBQVYUVLLTREVJYQTMKYRDMFD 
 The jumble of letters above form the first two lines of Jim Sanborn's mysterious sculpture, Kryptos . The complex process of unravelling it starts with the key that the sculpure features next to the code, an alphabet with the letters of the word "Kryptos" moved to the front. That reordered alphabet gets repeatedly reordered again by shifting the letters of a second keyword, "palimpsest", one at a time, with each shift providing an additional line. (You have to work out that "Kryptos" and "palimpsest" are the keywords on your own.) Finally, the jumbled key alphabets are placed in a table that can be used to substitute the original letters for corresponding answers. If all that gives you a headache, here's the solution: 
 "BETWEENSUBTLESHADINGANDTHEABSENCEOFLIGHTLIESTHENUANCEOFIQLUSION" 
 
 2009-07-14 – Smithsonian 
 Editors note, this is another long interview. I’ve tried to highlight sections relevant to Kryptos. 
 The following oral history transcript is the result of a recorded interview with Jim Sanborn on 2009 July 14-16. The interview took place at Sanborn's home in Washington, DC, and was conducted by Avis Berman for the Archives of American Art, Smithsonian Institution. This interview is part of the Archives of American Art's U.S. General Services Administration, Design Excellence and the Arts oral history project. 
 Jim Sanborn reviewed the transcript in 2020. His corrections and emendations appear below in brackets with initials. This transcript has been lightly edited for readability by the Archives of American Art. The reader should bear in mind that they are reading a transcript of spoken, rather than written, prose. 
 Interview 
 AVIS BERMAN:  This is Avis Berman recording Jim Sanborn on July 14, 2009, for the GSA Archives of American Art Oral History Project in his house and studio in Washington, D.C. I start the same way with everybody. Would you please state your full name and date of birth? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Herbert James Sanborn, Jr., 11/14/45. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. Okay. And when and why did you adopt the name Jim Sanborn? Or is it James Sanborn? 
 JIM SANBORN:  No, it's Jim. And Mom, from the earliest days, I guess it was Jimmy, then it was Jim. But I've always been known as Jim, not James. But for some reason the press liked James better than Jim. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  But you as an artist use Jim? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Jim exclusively. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. I'm assuming there's also the just not wanting to get confused with your father, who I guess was— 
 JIM SANBORN:  Well, he was actually Herb—Herbert. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Oh, okay. Right. But if you were named Herbert— 
 JIM SANBORN:  Right. There was also the—I was supposed to do that because I mean he was Herb or Sandy Sanborn. So he was never James. So I was always distinct in that. And maybe that was the reason. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. Well, also, if you were both Herbert, I mean— 
 JIM SANBORN:  He's an artist as well. So you could definitely get confused. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. And is your father still alive? 
 JIM SANBORN:  No. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Your father was Herbert James Sanborn. And what were his birth and death dates? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yeah, boy, 1907. That's tough—you know I don't know my parents' birth dates. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Okay. Well— 
 JIM SANBORN:  But he was born in 1907. I know that. But I don't know the date. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Oh, that's all right. And when did he die? [00:02:00] 
 JIM SANBORN:  Let's see. It would've been—let's see; it's tough. Let's see, he lived to be 89. I wish I wrote some of these things down. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Well, that's all right. 
 JIM SANBORN:  So if he was 89 plus '07. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  About 1996. 
 JIM SANBORN:  '96, okay. That sounds good to me. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Yes. And how about your mom? What was her full name? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Katherine Blood Sanborn. And she was three years younger than my dad. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  And is she still living? 
 JIM SANBORN:  No. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  And when did she die? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Two years before my father. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  And was that K-A-T-H— 
 JIM SANBORN:  K-A-T-H-E-R-I-N-E. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Okay. And do you have siblings? 
 JIM SANBORN:  No. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Okay. Well, I think it is— Let's start with some of the dynamics of your household. And because—it was clearly cultivated because your dad was an artist. He was a printmaker, is that correct? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. I mean he started out as a—he went to the Art Students League in New York. Then he got a Pulitzer Traveling Fellowship and traveled all through Europe and Italy and Spain and was in Paris in '29. And has been interviewed by the [Archives of] American Art for that period. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Oh, great. 
 JIM SANBORN:  By someone like yourself—30 years ago, 20 years ago—about his years in Paris. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  So this is great. So I think this is just overlapping here. I think this is our first Archives of American Art two-generation set of interviews. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. And so, yes, he started out I guess as a painter and watercolorist and also printmaker. And then he became—[00:04:00]—he went into military service and was gone in both the Navy and the Army doing audiovisual material in World War II. And then left that to become the director—museum director of the Davenport Art Museum. And then the Oglebay Institute where he ran a WPA program in painting for federal buildings, public art program. Then he was the director of the Children's Museum in Queens. And then he became the exhibitions director of the Library of Congress in DC where he stayed for 30 years. And that's what he did. And he was also the president of the American Institute of Graphic Arts. And a variety of other things. But interested in printmaking all the time. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. Well, that's pretty impressive. Now does this mean you were living in Davenport, Iowa, and you were— 
 JIM SANBORN:  No, I wasn't conceived until he started just after the Oglebay part in Wheeling, West Virginia, directorship. And then he came to Washington, D.C., to the Library of Congress. And I was born here in Washington at the Columbia Hospital for Women. And, yes. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  It used to be the old baby hospital, I guess. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Oh, absolutely. Yes. I can still see it, but it's not what it was. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  And how did your parents meet? 
 JIM SANBORN:  When my father was the director of the Davenport Art Museum, my mother gave a piano recital. She was a pianist, sort of a prodigy kind of person that had actually played a large venue in Manhattan as a child. [00:06:00] So she did a piano recital, and they met that way. And her father was very—well, he was very well known, and this was in Rock Island, Illinois. And was very—their family is very cultured. He taught Latin in Rock Island. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Well, why don't we just briefly go into your maternal grandparents. Did you know them? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. I mean on my mother's side, yes. My father's parents died early and young. So the other [grand]parents in Illinois, Rock Island, Illinois, my grandfather was Albert Blood, and he was notable for a variety of reasons. He was superintendent of schools for Park Ridge, Illinois, outside Chicago, I guess. And was the first one to put indoor plumbing in a schoolhouse. And he taught Latin and the classics. Then somehow in putting in the—moving the outhouse indoors, he started the A.M. Blood Company, which sold—one of the first companies that sold school equipment. And then he ran that company for many years. And he ended up being the oldest Rotarian, died at 103. And could recite poetry for hours. And actually his poetry recitals are at the Library of Congress in their Poetry Division. He was taped by someone like yourself [they laugh] for his poetry. And he wrote poetry and could also recite James [inaudible] verbatim at the age of 102 with an Irish brogue, all these things. [00:08:00] 
 AVIS BERMAN:  So he was a bit of an actor, too, or a performer. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes, no question about it. He made his own records of his recitals, many, many. When I was a child, he had his own record recording machine. So he would do his own poetry and recite it and then record it in the house. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. And was your grandmother similarly eclectic? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Not notably. I think she was—she came from an old family of Tomlinsons, it was a large family. And I have pictures of them in the mid-1800s, 18 children in their family, and she was one of them—the youngest. And, no, I think she was a wife in the Midwest, and that was her role. Right. Then my mom went I guess to—got a degree from Augustana College—I guess it's in Rock Island. Yes. In Rock Island. And then when she came to Washington. She started her own business doing picture research for books and television and public radio and did historical research and found photographs for—you know we'd often have large manuscripts of books and publications and scripts around that she was finding—going through attics literally finding great stuff, photographs for people. Had an office at the Library of Congress that she did research in. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Now that's a pretty enterprising business. And when did she start this? 
 JIM SANBORN:  [00:10:00] Probably not until her 50s. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Because, you know, to figure out, okay, identify this is a need. This is something I could do and make a go of this. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes, it was good. I mean it was called KBS [Katherine Blood Sanborn –JS] Picture Research. And, yes, she was pretty good at it and did it for many years. I have quite a few of the books that, you know, she did fit those things into. So I mean, having the Library of Congress was a resource that was very valuable to her, as it was to my dad, and as it was to me. I ultimately find that out after, you know, many years. You know it's funny. The research thing was something I never thought I wanted to do. Maybe it was because they did it. But it was a major component of my future—to be my future occupation. And before then—I don't know. I mean my parents—neither of my parents—both my parents were only children. And so I had very few relatives—I have no relatives virtually that I know. But my grandparents would drive back from Illinois until my grandfather was over a hundred. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  So you were close to them? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. And they were very supportive and really wanted, you know—they were interested in what I was doing and when I decided to be an artist all of that [inaudible]. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  So in your household, so clearly did you know you wanted to be—I mean what kind of a kid were you? I guess I should say. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Well, I know that I liked to build things from a very early age. [00:12:00] Whether it was tree houses with sliding metal doors or underground structures. I would gather together my cohorts and people the same age to work for me to build these structures. And so—but at the time it wasn't so much—it wasn't art-related. My dad taught painting classes during the summer for kids. And so we'd have a whole group in the front yard; all the neighborhood people would come and study painting in our yard. And then another person in the community, an old family friend, would do theater. And somebody else would do music. And so the neighborhood was more or less—it was a very creative environment. It was a suburban—Alexandria, Arlington—situation. But the neighbors were all smart people and wanted their children to be cultured and creative and all these things. And most of us have kept in touch since then. So it was a very fertile environment. 
 And in addition, because of my father's job at the Library of Congress, my mother also enjoyed being a hostess. And so they gave lots of parties for the poets-in-residence at the Library of Congress, visiting artists, you know. Herman Zaph, the famous typographer, came to the house and stayed. As did most of the poets-in-residence. Josephene Jacobson. A variety of other people came to the house. And then of course I'd go to the Library of Congress recitals and music events and all of those things associated with that. [00:14:00] And then I'd also go to art openings because of my dad's and my mother, you know, they'd both go to all the art openings in Washington. Knew all the museum directors and all those people. And so those kinds of people were around all the time. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. Now did you take that painting class that your father gave? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. I have a picture of myself taking that painting class. I don't know that I excelled. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  And were you interested in learning printmaking. 
 JIM SANBORN:  I wasn't interested in making art at all really until the last two years of college. And what started it was—I was mostly into building cars. And my summer jobs were working for automobile repair places that would fix fiberglass cars and things like this. Because I knew how to make things smooth and nice in this kind of business. And I was very much into sports cars and things like that. So that occupied a lot of my time. In addition to that, though, I was also doing electronics and kits and science fairs routinely. Things to do with electrical things and science and fossil hunting and digging up skeletons and these kinds of things. Things that a lot of kids do, I guess, today. Very much into dinosaurs, I remember that. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  But you were encouraged, you know, your interests were encouraged as opposed to saying, No, don't do that. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Oh, they were definitely encouraging from a creative standpoint. Now I know that when I was, I guess I was eight years old, I did a paper, illustrated paper, on what I wanted to be when I grew up. And I did a drawing of a building: my studio behind my house where I was an inventor. [00:16:00] And I would invent things all day. And then I would hang out with other inventors and this kind of business. So I did very young—I was inspired to do something, I guess, quasi-entrepreneurial, you know, on my own. As opposed to wanting to be a teacher or an astronaut or whatever else that, you know, I was—but it wasn't art-related. It was all about invention more than art. I mean my parents and I were very close because I was an only child. And so I think all children in their adolescence don't necessarily want to be that close with their parents. So perhaps I eschewed art, high art, because of that. 
 I didn't come around to it until I took a course in archaeology at Oxford University. It was a Columbia University-Oxford Exchange Program. It was in '67. And I went to Oxford, went on archaeological excavations. That encouraged me to write a paper just after that as a junior—I guess it was as a junior or senior in college—write a paper on Romanesque sculpture because I was interested in medieval art history. So I changed my major from sociology—I got a double major in college from sociology, sort of anthropological sociology—social anthropology—which related to archaeology. And then I had to do a paper on Romanesque sculpture. [00:18:00] I decided to carve one as a way to do it. From then on it was—I had much more fun making the art than writing about it. So that's what started it all. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. Well, I'm going to backtrack a little bit. In high school, were you a good student? 
 JIM SANBORN:  I was a terrible student. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Why was that? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Well, before high school I went to a place called Burgundy Farms County Day School. And it was a great—it was a wonderful school, and it was very much about nature, nature study. And we did music and plays, and it was a very creative environment. It was a private school through eighth grade. Very influential. My art teacher I knew very well. Still, I mean—her son and I are still good friends. And it was a very important in my life, this private institution. I was taken from that and put in public high school, Jeb Stuart High School, in Fairfax. And it was a shocking transition, as was—actually I went one year, maybe it was seventh grade—I left Burgundy and went to a middle school and then to high school. And I remember in middle school my mother trying to get me to take ballet. That really didn't work. I felt really embarrassed. So that didn't work. And then I tried to do, you know, other things like I remember musical instruments, trumpet; I wanted to play the trumpet. I tried the piano; that didn't last that long. 
 But when I got into high school, everybody was into cars and girls and all that stuff. [00:20:00] And there was absolutely no competition for grades. And I was completely bored to death. And I am totally unable to do mathematics. So every single summer I was tutored. I never had a summer off. I was tutored in math constantly because I could never get above an F. And the rest of school—I did not do well with tests. I couldn't take tests. I generated too much anxiety, and I just, you know, did very badly with testing, period. But I was interested in science and geometry; I liked and did okay in geometry. But the rest of math, toast. So my grades were basically Cs and Ds when I graduated from high school. And I did very badly on—I guess the SATs are high school tests? 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Yes. 
 JIM SANBORN:  I did very badly on that. So I went an extra year to private school, to Christchurch School for Boys in Virginia, in Christchurch, Virginia. And it was a boys' school. And there the thing was grades, and everybody was interested in doing things that involved learning. And I started doing really well. I did very well. When everybody was competing for that, I started competing for grades, and I did fine. And entered science fairs down there, and was much more into that. I still had my interest in cars which I even carried into college. But I did very well there. Well enough there that I got into college—but only because the former headmaster from Christchurch was the dean of Randolph-Macon College. So they let me in as a favor; that's what they told me. [00:22:00] They said I'd flunk out in the first semester. When I went to my interview, based on my previous reports, I was going to fail within the first semester. So I was the only one from my prep school, though, that stayed in. Everybody else flunked out. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  So I guess—but did that start as a girls' college? 
 JIM SANBORN:  No, no. Randolph-Macon—no. There are two. There's a Randolph-Macon Women's College in western Virginia, and this is in eastern Virginia, Ashland; it's the men's college. Now it's coed. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Okay. Yes, the Randolph—I guess that's because I just, the Randolph-Macon Women's College became infamous for selling off their art. I didn't know that there were men there. So okay, two different places. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Two different [inaudible]. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. Okay. Now, was college something you were interested in or you felt you had to go or there was Vietnam or—what's going on here? 
 JIM SANBORN:  I wanted to go to college. My initial reaction was I was not good enough in science to become much of anything other than—sociology was the only thing I could thing I could handle that didn't have the mathematics. As opposed to archaeology. That's really what I wanted to take. I applied to many colleges, and nobody let me in. The only place I got in was Randolph-Macon. And that was this big favor. So I also got in basically on a basketball scholarship because I did very well because I was very tall. And actually in high school I did well with basketball. But I never was really into the—they wanted me for football also. But I never had—I did okay, but I could've done a whole lot better if I'd really been into it. [00:24:00] I wasn't that into it. When I went to Randolph-Macon I quit the first the first year on the basketball team because I wasn't into that. So at Randolph-Macon I followed the archaeology thing and sociology, and that was interesting; I wanted to study that. The seminal experience, though, down there, was one day I was driving around in one of my sports car things that I'd built in my dorm room, and happened upon an old mill in Ashland, Virginia. And I'd actually gone there parking with girlfriends. And it was just a beautiful place. 
 Then I noticed after I was at Randolph-Macon for a year, that somebody bought it and started fixing it up. And I found out that it was two artists. A guy named Jack Witt and Nancy Camden Witt; Nancy is the painter of note in the Richmond area. Jack is a sculptor, and he built a foundry in the mill. And she had a huge painting studio. And that's the way they lived. He taught one class or something at Randolph-Macon. But they had this really beautiful place and a big lake. And the mill actually had all the original—had all the machinery, and they left it in there and just lived that way. And it allowed me to see that you could be an artist, you know, and be on your own and not necessarily do anything else. At the time I didn't realize that her family was very wealthy, and that that enabled them to do what they were doing. But nonetheless, I saw the life of an artist there. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Sort of the way to be a painter or a sculptor in the world. [00:26:00] 
 JIM SANBORN:  Professionally, yes. And they did that. They made their art. They had galleries. They sold their art. And it was very inspiring to me. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  And well also I think you see that art wasn't something that you did; it was something that you were. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Exactly. I mean I just always remember— You know I'd go and stay over there sometimes. And I'd mostly be working with Jack, the sculptor, because I like working with my hands, and I wasn't a two-dimensional artist. Nancy, first thing in the morning she just –gone! Upstairs to the studio. You know, didn't see her again until, you know, five or six o'clock when we'd have dinner or something. You know, her studio was big; she did big paintings. And it was great. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  You saw she worked hard. 
 JIM SANBORN:  She worked really hard. And she had success. I mean, you know, she was very well reviewed at the time. This is 1960, '70. So it was great. And so I befriended them. I ultimately ended up taking one of Jack's courses at Randolph-Macon. And when I decided to do the double major, I did the double major in art history. And I stayed at Randolph-Macon longer, an extra semester, in order to do the double major. So I did do the double major in sociology and art history. And I got very good grades in art history. But I really liked—I still wanted the archaeology part. I did medieval art history—or ancient art history was what I was mostly interested in. And then the thing at Oxford, and the combination of that, you know, [00:28:00] and knowing the Witts and all that stuff, that was what really enabled me to do that. And then I carved—in college I was carving these big totem-like things at Randolph-Macon. And I was making such a mess in the dormitory— 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Carving wood? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. That they gave me my own studio in the basement of a building there. And I was really the only artist that physically made art at Randolph-Macon at the time. It was really early. They didn't really have—they didn't have a program for studio art at all. It was all just art history. But I was really the first studio artist they'd ever had. So they gave me my own place. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  But didn't Jack Witt teach some sort of studio course? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes, he did. But it wasn't—it was sort of like—I can't remember exactly how that worked. I mean, it was like drawing or something. You know it was a very simple thing. Everybody drew things on the campus. It didn't really have a studio per se. It was just a classroom that wasn't really—anyway. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Was it life drawing? I mean was there a model? 
 JIM SANBORN:  No, I don't remember that. It was just maybe the year I left was the first year he started teaching it. So it was very much—I was more or less on my own with the art education. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Now, when you were in Washington living near, or okay, living in Alexandria but going to these openings, were there artists or shows or people you remember from that environment, from being, you know, mixing with the scene at the time, the museum scene? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Well, I can't remember what the timing was exactly. But I know that later on, I guess when I was a senior before I went to graduate school—[00:30:00]—I'm pretty sure it was before I went to graduate school—Andy Warhol did a show in DC, and I went—he signed my book with a soup can and all that stuff. And I really enjoyed that. And there was a fledgling gallery scene. There was a Washington museum, what they called the Museum of Modern Art in Washington, was a private thing. And it was just starting up. But I mean I was, you know, at the time, I was really very conservative. The stuff that I was doing was pretty conservative. I mean my father did conservative work. I mean it was figurative. But he started—he did a lot of abstract art later, in later years. But at the time I mean I was [inaudible] doing. Some of it was—I did a Christ on a cross. I mean I was basically in Romanesque art, you know, so I did a Madonna, I did a Christ on a cross, I did a few birds, I did this kind of stuff. Hippopotamus and animals and stuff like that. I was carving. When I first started carving wood, my sphere of influence is very—sort of very small. And contemporary art had—you know, if I'd lived in Manhattan, it would've been a very different thing. But I was here, and it was a more conservative environment. So my influences were conservative. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. Well, I just wondered from even when you were a teenager, and your parents were going to these openings, and you saw these artists. And you were always in the museums. 
 JIM SANBORN:  It didn't make any difference to me. You know it was interesting. I was sitting—I'd go to an opening. I mean they would constantly have these artists, creative people around them. I sort of, kind of wanted to be off by myself, frankly. And, you know, I'd go to an opening. And the thing I remember, a very distinct moment: I remember my mother, she was holding my hand, I was a fairly small kid [00:32:00]; I guess I was fairly little, and I was kind of looking up, you know. They were at an opening. My father and my mother, there were paintings, and my mother looks at the paintings, and they're talking—my father and mother are talking about, these are terrible; I mean these are really awful paintings. And so we walked a little farther, and meet the artist, you know. And my mother said, "Oh, I just love your paintings. Your paintings are just fabulous!" And my father, both of them, just lying through their teeth. I'm standing there, looking up at my mother being disingenuous about art, you know. And it had some major effect on me. It was really interesting. It sort of— 
 AVIS BERMAN:  It was a mini lesson in the art world, I think. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes, a serious lesson—a very early lesson in the art world, you know. And I made her explain herself later, you know. But it was a serious lesson. And my dad was—you know he had his own openings. I remember going to those. But I really didn't like going to openings. I just hated it. And, you know, it made me a sort of anti-artist. I don't what it was about it, but I didn't want anything to do with it. For many years I just didn't want to deal with it. 
 So I made—the only thing that I did do from a very small age was there was a woman,Vally Possony, and she was a potter, a ceramicist, a ceramic artist. And lived in a wonderful house designed by Wharton Esherick. And she also lived the life of an artist, a ceramic artist. And I took classes with her from the age about seven to about 15. That I liked. And I made ceramic animals, and we fired them and glazed them, and did the whole thing there. And I really enjoyed that. And that was very influential also. [00:34:00] Again, this was another artist, full time, having her own business. A woman. It was interesting. It was just, you know—that was important to me. 
 So the ceramic thing I carried along. I couldn't draw—I mean I had my drawings, but, you know, my parents said, Oh, these are great. I didn't feel that I could draw, and I still don't feel as if I can draw very well. Anyway, so the ceramics thing was important. And then the art at Burgundy Farms were important early influences. But I didn't want to have anything to do with it until later in college. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Now how did you at Randolph-Macon latch onto this Columbia University-Oxford Exchange? 
 JIM SANBORN:  My parents I think found out about it. Actually, no. I think it was the chairman of the department, you know, had a thing on his board, on his wall, as most university things, opportunities, programs. And so my parents decided to—they thought that was a great idea to do that because it was archaeology. But again, even early on, I never wanted to be—I don't know what it was about it—I never wanted to be an archaeologist because I didn't want to go get a doctorate. I didn't want to do the formal educational parts of getting a higher degree in archaeology or art history or sociology. And I didn't want to go that far with any of those things. Because I saw and knew a lot of people who did that [00:36:00] and ended up as professors and doing fairly tedious work. And there were very few people—very few people that ended up really doing fieldwork, which is what I wanted to do. So anyway. So the Oxford thing was something that was very important to me. And I actually got engaged to a woman I met there—a long time ago, very young to get engaged. But I got disengaged very quickly. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  A narrow escape. 
 JIM SANBORN:  A narrow escape with a Bryn Mawr girl. And so that was my Bryn Mawr year dealing with her and going to Bryn Mawr and staying at Haverford and living that kind of life. And, you know, hanging around that crowd. But I did like—Because Bryn Mawr was kind of like Oxford, and I enjoyed being there. And again, this was a very strong woman who was very much into the archaeology and doing—making a life of it. So. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. Well, and was this an entire year? How long did this program last? 
 JIM SANBORN:  It was only through the summer. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Oh, so it was a summer program? So that was like after sophomore or junior year? 
 JIM SANBORN:  It was junior year. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  So you were in England for three months, or did you travel? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes, England three months. And then traveled after that—or before then. I traveled through Europe, more or less a cathedral tour. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Because I was wondering when, you know, if you were, as a fan of Romanesque art, if you got yourself to France or Spain. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes, yes. I did all of the cathedrals in England and France. And didn't get to Spain. But I went to Germany and a variety of places, going after cathedrals. [00:38:00] 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Okay. And that was a big deal. And then I—right. And then I went to graduate school. And I also went again to Europe after that a couple of times. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  What was it like being at Oxford for the first time? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Oh, it was great. I mean I loved it. It was—I went on two major—I did two major things: One was I was on basically—we did a course. The course had actually been—we fanned out across England to do archaeological digs. So I did a dig in Southampton, England, where we were excavating the port city—the original port city of Southampton. And it hadn't been rebuilt after World War II. So it was a grand opportunity for archaeologists to go in and dig up as much as they could before it was rebuilt. Unfortunately, though, I was large, tall, and strong, and was given the duty that the girls didn't get. So the girls were given the little brushes and the little trowels. I was given the large shovels and wheelbarrows. For a large portion of the day, I was the muscle. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  [Laughs]. Uh-huh [affirmative]. 
 JIM SANBORN:  When I finally did start excavating things, it was really great. And I ended up finding a skeleton, one of the only skeletons they found. And the second job I had was with my soon-to-be fiancée. And we did a—we were asked to measure, completely measure, the Chapel of St. Peter in Oxford because it was going to be converted into a library, I think, or a cafeteria. [00:40:00] I don't remember. I'm writing a book myself right now. So I've got to recreate these events [laughs] also. But anyway. So in the act of measuring, we discovered one of the walls was eight feet thick, and all the rest of the walls were about three feet thick. So we started removing stones in the crypt and discovered a passageway that hadn't been opened since the 11th century. Which was a really wonderful, mysterious thing. It had a great effect on my life—as did the excavation in Oxford also—in Southampton. They were very inspiring events. But again, I knew that I didn't want to be an Oxford professor or some sort of professor. I wanted to be—but I did want to do the more glamorous parts of archaeology without having to go through all that other dry stuff. So that was the Oxford experience. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. And did you go to London? Or did you see any of— 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  —Roman Britain or anything like that? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Definitely the Roman Britain thing. One of my best friends of the family was doing a course in archaeology—or did. She was on a dig at Westminster. And so I visited Westminster Cathedral and worked for a short time on that excavation that she was working on. And yes. We did London, Denmark, Germany, England, France; I think that's it. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. And were you going to any museums? 
 JIM SANBORN:  All the usual museums. All the, you know, [inaudible] in Amsterdam, the Rijksmuseum. All the major museums, the Tate, the British Museum. [00:42:00] Generally tending toward the classics: Greek, Roman, Romanesque. I don't know why it was that I liked the medieval period, but that's what I chose. And when I took my art history and things like that and history—because in order to get art history—because I had to take a lot of history in college, I took medieval history, a lot of it. And I think it was because of the simplicity of the art. I didn't like Baroque. I didn't like the more—the Renaissance period and all of that was too blatantly figurative for me for some reason. And Romanesque period and medieval period was simplified and stylized, and in a way abstracted. And if I was going to deal with figurative, it was going to be like that rather than, you know, a Michelangelo approach. Perhaps that was the reason I preferred that to the other. I don't know. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  So it's about abstraction and simplicity. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  But do you think it was about volume, too, and flatness? Or I don't know. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Well, Romanesque, I mean all the Romanesque art basically is more, you know, it's a much more massive and bulky and— 
 AVIS BERMAN: Yes. And a lot of bas-relief in the sculpture, too. 
 JIM SANBORN:  There is a lot of bas-relief, and it was easier. [They laugh.] Okay? If you're actually going to carve it, I mean I did—I'm sure, as most sculptors do who are carving things, I was certainly into the Michelangelo approach with, [00:44:00] you know, you get a giant piece of marble and start from one point, and get an elbow, and you know, another point get a toe, and start working inward. And the whole idea of, you know, negative carving, I got into that. And so the things I carved, I, you know—but I realized that I didn't really have the confidence or the drive to duplicate that kind of carving. You know I didn't really think I had the talent for that kind of visualization at that point in my life. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Well, you still didn't have the training. 
 JIM SANBORN:  I didn't have the training at all. But I mean, yes, sure. Grandiose delusions that maybe someday. But, on the other hand, realizing the genius of the ability to do that and to do it so well. And my father could draw very well. And painted very well. And could do the figure well and abstracted it well. But I was unable to do that. I couldn't make a likeness. I suppose because I wasn't intimating a likeness and wasn't trained to make likenesses. My father had tremendous formal training at the Art Students League and everything else. But he'd been making art since he was a child and always was a good draftsman. So that was—but I didn't feel as if I got that gene. I felt like I could create. But it wasn't necessarily that kind of art. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  But you didn't really know, because you were in a conservative environment, that there were other options of that kind of art yet, is that correct? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  And so at this moment you are carving. Are you modeling? Are you using clay? Or are you just carving [inaudible]? 
 JIM SANBORN:  No. It was largely subtractive. Except earlier when I was doing the ceramics, and I was making some animals. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Things like that. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  So are you carving stone or wood? [00:46:00] 
 JIM SANBORN:  It was primarily wood. I didn't—yes, it was wood. There wasn't any stone involved; it was wood. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  So you're not really thinking about materials yet, in other words. 
 JIM SANBORN:  No. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Just, you know, the technique. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. [Inaudible.] Well, part of it—I know that when I was here—again, I'm not great on the dates, but my dad—there was a big show of David Smith's work in DC; I believe at the National Museum of American Art. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  I think that would've been about 1970—I'm just guessing. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. Joshua Taylor was a good friend of my father's. He was the director of the museum at that time. And I remember going to a lecture and meeting him—meeting Joshua Taylor later, you know. And I was really, really into David Smith. And I really enjoyed the work. And I remember meeting him later, and he said, "Gosh! You ought to be a sculptor. You've got the hands for it. They're the right size." You know. And so I just remember him saying that, you know, and I really wanted to do it. And it reinforced my thinking that I could maybe be a sculptor. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Well, a lot of sculptors really do have a physical quality to them as people. 
 JIM SANBORN:  It is a very physical thing. It requires tremendous physical strength. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Stamina, too. 
 JIM SANBORN:  And stamina. And obsession. And so hours and hours and hours of pounding away at something isn't for everyone for sure. But I did enjoy doing it. [00:48:00] And so that was important. I'm just trying to think if there were other early effects. I know that in writing this book thing that I'm doing, I'm trying to recreate some of this stuff. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  What is your book about that you're writing? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Kryptos [1990]. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Oh, so it's just—was that just the title, or is it just only about— 
 JIM SANBORN:  Kryptos from the source. It's going to be a biography—biographical also. I mean I just sent the proposal yesterday to the agent. I've got an agent, a fancy agent in New York called me and said we're doing a book on Kryptos . Oh, really? So I spent the last three weeks writing [inaudible]. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. Okay. 
 JIM SANBORN:  My first attempt. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Okay. Well, good luck. 
 JIM SANBORN:  That's later. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Yes, yes. 
 JIM SANBORN:  So my father brought the Dead Sea Scrolls to the Library of Congress. The first time they'd ever been seen in the United States. And I remember handling—we don't do that today. But I remember, you know, that really—from the archaeological standpoint, they were just wonderful. And being close to that. I remember writing one of my earliest high school—I guess it was high school—papers about it, you know, and doing all the research down at the Library, physically looking at them and all this stuff. And then the other time was when my father was handcuffed to the Gutenberg Bible when they were taking it to New York to be—to go to the Metropolitan [Museum of Art] or whatever. And the importance of that. You know, that art is that important that you've got to be handcuffed to it. You know, it just—it was fascinating to me. So those two things were really important to me, you know, in seeing those things. And in part being of tremendous to me, myself. And my father also did this great show on papermaking. [00:50:00] He brought in papyrus and papyrus things from Egypt and all this stuff. So I, you know, always saw this stuff. So I knew a lot about it, you know—subliminally, though. You know, I just sort of collected all those bits of information. Used it all later, but much later. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. Well, I think what's also very interesting, though, is you're seeing them as art objects. But all of these things are making a great deal of difference to you, which is part of archaeology. They're all about inscriptions and words, too, and the very talismanic power of words, of language. So I think that's important, too. 
 JIM SANBORN:  And we had these friends—we had two friends. One was the Upjohns, and Mr. [Everard M.] Upjohn was the writer of art history books, a very famous guy. And we used to go spend summers with them on an island in Maine. And then we also had very good friends named the Heaths. Actually Tom Heath was my father's—one of my parents' best friends, but also their minister, Episcopal minister. And we used to visit the Heaths in Maine also. And they had a wonderful house, and the Heaths had—Tom Heath's parents had a house designed by Frank Lloyd Wright. And the parents' house was the Heath House in Buffalo, New York. And I remember that they—when they sold the house, they kept the furniture; they had it all at their house in Maine. I remember all of this wonderful furniture. And I bring this up because it's important later. And I just remembered that they had a chair that I really loved sitting in. [00:52:00] It was a big chair because, I mean, I'm a big person, and I don't get comfortable in very many things. And they had a great chair that I enjoyed. And I guess for some reason—I guess I said that I liked it or that I admired it. This was when I was pretty young. I mean I was eight, 10, 12 years old at the time when we visited them. And so, you know, I was exposed to that kind of architecture, and I really enjoyed Frank Lloyd Wright and all of that. 
 And then when I decided I'd become an artist when I was in high school, the last year of high school—actually I'd just graduated. I had just graduated and gone to Randolph-Macon, and decided I wanted to be an artist or archaeologist—this big crate arrives at my door, and that chair is in it. So I had this Frank Lloyd Wright chair, and I carried it around with me everywhere I went. And, you know, it was part of my life for a long time, many years. Anyway, so I had that for years. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Still have it? 
 JIM SANBORN:  No. But it's the reason that I have this house, and I have a little island, and the studio and everything is owing to the sale of that single chair. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Fantastic. 
 JIM SANBORN:  So it was very important to my life. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Yes. Exactly. That's wonderful. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  I just want to digress for a minute— 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Because you've mentioned this several times; because, I mean, I guess I should say for the tape, how tall are you? 
 JIM SANBORN:  6'7". 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Uh-huh [affirmative]. And were you ever heavy or large? 
 JIM SANBORN:  No, I wasn't really heavy. When I was growing up, I was a little heavy. I was embarrassed because I was a little heavy. But then once I—actually in high school at the age of 14 I grew six inches in six months. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  So you must have been—because it seemed to me what you were talking about is that you seem to have reached—you got tall very early. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. Well, six inches in six months at the age of 14. I went from—I was still six feet at 13, you know. So I was always—my father was 6'2"; my mother wasn't that tall, like her father was 6'2". So it was very strange, but it skipped a generation. But somehow I got to 6'7". But I was also—but I was tall. I mean I was pretty tall. I remember having a hard time getting in movies for kids' prices. So I had to take my birth certificate to get in the movies. Nobody believed I was as young as I was. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  I mean, was it difficult for you to be so tall? I mean did it make you feel like an outsider or anything? 
 JIM SANBORN:  No, not so much. I think I felt more self-conscious about being a little heavy than tall when I was younger. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  And do you think—you know, I mean a lot of artists talk about making art in terms—I mean sculpture is always something because you move around, around it. The body enters into it. Have you found that in some ways your art is related not just to your body as a generality, but to your size? Do you find that that makes a difference? 
 JIM SANBORN:  I don't know. I don't know if my body image got into it. All I know is that my size and strength assisted me in my belief that I could make or build anything that I wanted to make or build. [00:56:00] Okay? So if I'd been really small, weak and frail, I wouldn't have been able to do what I did. And that's significant. And I started out, I mean, from early on, doing things that were heavy and large, you know, from the beginning. And the belief that I could make anything, I'm sure, was instilled in me by my parents, who were very, you know, just continually reinforced everything I did. And even though I was hell to live with, even in my baby book. [They laugh.] My mother—whatever. I was not—I didn't have an easy personality. So I really had—whatever I wanted, I had to get.  So I was kind of spoiled and difficult and large, but not only physically. Okay? Anger wasn't ever a part of my life, which is a good thing because I was so big. Gentle giant situation, I'd say. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. Okay. Now how did you get to Pratt? 
 JIM SANBORN:  So when I graduated from Randolph-Macon, because I took an extra semester, I ended up with a spare semester. And my father always had a studio behind our house—or next to our house. The studio was about half the size of the house. And it was always there; sort of cinderblock contemporary for the period, modern kind of studio. [00:58:00] And he had a big—a printing press, a pretty old printing press that used lithograph stones, and his business was actually—he, as an artist, he called himself the Stone Press because there's a picture of a press on his card and all of this stuff. And that studio, I mean I was raised in that studio. My portrait was done in that studio. My dad did my portrait. And I hung out in that studio. I had parties in that studio. So that was important to the artist's studio aspect of this. So I took a semester off and worked in my father's studio. I did some prints. I did some lithographs. I did some carving. I did some very simple geometric wall pieces made out of ceiling tile and other things. More or less to build up a portfolio because I didn't have any undergraduate art training in studio art. So I had to build a portfolio that was good enough to get me into graduate school in art. 
 And so Pratt's program was—it was only the second year that they had graduate sculpture at Pratt. And I mean they'd always done well—I mean they'd always been a pretty well-known art school in design—more design and architecture than fine arts at the time. But they started a graduate program—this is like, I think it was the second year that they started it. So I applied. [01:00:00] At the time I think they were letting anybody in because they needed students for the new program. And so I lucked out, and I got into that based on some pretty—I know at this point some horrific artwork. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  What did the prints look like? 
 JIM SANBORN:  They were pretty—they were very abstract. I did one called *Peptic Pandora *because my stomach was killing me, and my stomach was always an issue. Now it's a major issue in my life. Whatever is going on in my life is reflected in my stomach. Anyway. And I did some fairly abstract—some abstract things, primitively abstract. And I remember at Pratt, when I got there, I made a clay—you know, we were—everybody was sort of, okay, you've got to do what you want to do. We're going to meet, have our first class after about two weeks. So everybody brought in what they'd made. And the first sit-down critique I'd ever had in my life. One of the reasons I refused to go to art school—because I didn't have the confidence. I knew it would be very hard for me to get through a critique. And there are quite a few artists who quit making art because they couldn't handle critiques. And I knew I couldn't, and I knew I didn't want to deal with it. 
 But by that time I was—I got somewhat arrogant, I guess, doing what I was doing because my influences were fairly conservative, and they weren't that sophisticated. So whatever I did was great. Okay. So I was getting support from my parents and my parents' friends and this other stuff, you know. So if you're in a mediocre artistic milieu, your critiques aren't going to be that great. So anyway, so I got—I had enough confidence to do this. And so I made this tortured head, representational head thing. I vaguely remember it. [01:02:00] And the other people, several of them, were from Manhattan and, you know, were doing these more modern, contemporary—one guy was even doing Conceptual documentation or something, you know. Clearly completely out of my realm, you know, completely. And so I go there. And basically there are only about six of us, maybe seven, six or seven of us in a class. And our teacher was Robert Zakarian, and he was a sculptor. And my other teachers—I had Jacob Landau and Zakarian; Calvin Albert, who was the figure sculptor. So there were a couple of people—you needed to do figure with Calvin Albert. I mean he was a well-known figure sculptor. 
 Anyway, so I did this thing. And the general consensus was: What are you thinking? What do you think this is, 1940? You know, and I was like destroyed. Okay? Completely destroyed, you know. And so that prompted a tremendous amount of introspection and going around to the galleries, the new galleries in SoHo. And at that time, there weren't that many. I mean there were very few. OK Harris had opened up. And Sonnabend might have just opened. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Yes, they were opening '70, '71. 
 JIM SANBORN:  '70 is when I started. '70, '71 was when I was at Pratt. The World Trade Center was being built while I was watching it being built. So I spent a lot of time going to galleries and going to openings in Manhattan. Getting to know what contemporary art was. And I remember seeing some shows that really thrilled me, and it was great. And so very quickly I started making very abstract stuff. [01:04:00] And large, very large—again, carvings, but they were Styrofoam carvings of simple organic forms. You know ten, 12, 14 feet high. And because Pratt had been given a huge amount of Styrofoam by Dow Chemical Company, it was all sitting there. Nobody was using it. I mean the rest of the students either were Calvin Albert's straight representational figure artists working in plaster and clay. Or they were—they had their own studios somewhere in Manhattan and were working with Conceptual documentation or various simple things. And then a couple were just off-the-walls things. 
 So I got a studio. I was living in a little house for $50 a month on Myrtle Avenue under the Myrtle Avenue El, elevated train, at Myrtle Avenue. And then I got a studio—I got a house for 50 bucks, and my studio was $35, and that was up the street. And didn't have any water or heat. So I worked in there. But mostly I worked in the studio at Pratt, with this huge, unlimited supply of Styrofoam. And I laminated it together and started carving these huge organic forms out of Styrofoam. And I can't remember what the name of it was. The second year I—what was it? Anyway, I ended up submitting—it was the shortest thesis they'd ever accepted. [They laugh.] It was a six-page thesis—[01:06:00] because you had to write a thesis—and it was six pages or seven pages, and I still have it someplace. But it was about the organic forms, connecting and disconnecting. And I made these big things that went out of the window, out into the street. This kind of stuff. 
 I did very well, and I got a full fellowship the second year. And became the tech guy; as part of my fellowship, you had to do a teaching thing. I was the tech guy for the graduate department for the second year. Then I also had to teach a course at Kingsborough Community College, which was a living hell. And knew at that point in time that the last thing in the world I'd ever want to do was teach. It was sort of a mass lecture situation with 700 students in an auditorium. Most of them were stoned out of their minds on pot. You know it was just reeking of pot. I mean it was like nobody was interested. Whatever. Had to show art appreciation. 
 But I really did enjoy doing these huge carvings and going around to galleries and trying to, you know, show them what I was doing. Ivan Karp was very kind and directed me to several people a couple of months after I got out of graduate school. Nothing came of it, but it was an interesting experience, you know, going to some hotel room and meeting some collector. But getting to know the galleries in Manhattan, getting to know the museums in Manhattan and the whole art scene was the most valuable experience in graduate school. You know it just completely transformed what—I mean it just changed what art was. [01:08:00] And it was like night and day. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Yes, you needed it. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  And besides Zakarian, was he influential on you? Or I mean were there other people who were there that you gravitated toward? 
 JIM SANBORN:  No. I mean graduate school—I mean graduate school was sort of—it's different from undergraduate. You're supposed to already have your shit together. [They laugh.] Okay? And you're supposed to know what you're doing, right? And since there were so few of us, only seven people, there were a couple of the other students that I befriended, and we would hang out and go to openings together and things like this. But I knew that Zakarian made art, but frankly he wasn't that serious about it. And I realized that when we went to visit his studio, fairly quickly, that he was a teacher not a big artist. And that was—we visited somebody else's studio there, a studio in Manhattan, and the same thing. They weren't, you know—I realized that teaching was a trap that you might not escape from as an artist. So I didn't really gravitate toward either of them. I gravitated more towards spending time in Manhattan and going to see, you know, some really interesting, what I thought were conceptual, minimal interesting stuff there in Manhattan. And was much more interested in that. But I was shy, so I didn't befriend that many people. I just—I've never been gregarious. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  So if you went to an opening, and you saw Donald Judd there, would you have approached him? [01:10:00] 
 JIM SANBORN:  Probably not. I've never been really good at that. There were people—I mean, certainly, you know, I went to all those shows of [Dan] Flavin, and, you know, all the people of that period. It was, you know, it was really great. I remember Wolfgang Laib, but that was later actually, later. His marble and milk pieces. And I did spend a lot of time at that whole—there was a group of galleries—I guess it was, who was the Australian guy? He had the downstairs gallery; Sonnabend was upstairs. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Oh, his first name—Max Hutchinson. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Max Hutchinson, right. Hutchinson—I used to go to Hutchinson's all the time, talked to him. And I remember di Suvero as having—had his first show there. And I watched him install. And I always wanted Max to show my work, and he never showed it. He never did show it. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  So what did you think of Mark di Suvero's work when you saw it? 
 JIM SANBORN:  I liked it a lot. I mean I liked the ambition and the scale. And, yes, I liked the scale and the ambition of that. I mean it was great. Sort of before the accident. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Yes. 
 JIM SANBORN:  You know he was much more—he was doing well and was able to pull off these huge things, and move these big things around. And so, once again, it was—I could see that, you know, you can make anything if you want to. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. And after the accident he used cranes for his arms and legs. 
 JIM SANBORN:  That's right. That's right. But again, with di Suvero's work, I lost interest in it because it didn't have—for me it didn't have intellectual content. [01:12:00] It didn't have the content that I felt was needed. And so I lost interest in the work. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  And at that time, what kind of intellectual content did your work have? 
 JIM SANBORN:  I'm trying to think—it's difficult because I went to school at Pratt. And then I came back, and I taught at the community college for a while, for a couple of years. But still going back and forth to Manhattan. I didn't have a place to live. But then I did get a place to live later. It wasn't 'til the '80s that I lived in SoHo for a couple of years. So it's hard for me to know when I saw what. 
 AVIS BERMAN: Well, this is the other question: I guess you—when you were finished with your master's degree, did you want to stay in New York? 
 JIM SANBORN:  I basically, my last year of graduate school, I basically had my first nervous breakdown. It was a very—getting through my opening for my graduate show was extremely hard. You know, I don't know what it was, but I became increasingly anxious my last year of graduate school. And I now think it was—well, I was 25, and 25 is a very hard period of anybody's life if you're dealing with college. And all of a sudden you're out of college after being in school for your whole life, and then you're out, you know. And I didn't know what I was going to do with art or any of that stuff. [01:14:00] And I just more or less lost touch with reality. For almost a year, it was just really difficult to exist. And so—then I started seeing a psychiatrist in DC. And had to go back and forth. 
 And New York didn't help. The pressure and all that stuff didn't help. So I didn't want to stay there—I couldn't stay there. Psychologically, physically, I was too much of a mess to stay. And so I took more than one—about two years of anti-depressants and whatever else to get me out of that depressed period. And so basically that landed me back in DC. Then I got married. She was someone I had met in college, but who was going to school in Manhattan. So I lived with her part of the time. And that, you know, kept me going with Manhattan, you know. But I think I married her to get out of my depression. That worked for a while—for a year or two. But as far as making art, I made these huge pieces. I moved them to DC, the huge graduate student pieces. And I rented a house just out—you know, I got out of graduate school, I got married, we rented a house, and I had a garage studio. I had these huge pieces left over from graduate school. And there was a gallery in Washington called the Henry Gallery—Henri Gallery. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. Mm-hmm [affirmative]. [01:16:00] 
 JIM SANBORN:  And Henri was doing very well. And I guess their major artist at the time would be—I remember Robert Stackhouse was showing. Martin Puryear had his first show at Henri. I wasn't that enthused about his first show; I liked his second show at Henri. And I showed my work to Henri, and she really liked it. And so she was going to show me and David Smith. My big break, okay? My big break. So I have these huge pieces made out of Styrofoam. And so I had to make them more solid. They were flocked: latex, house paint and sawdust originally. And I felt as if I needed to make them stronger. So I was going to spray them with polyester resin. Because I'd known about the fiberglass from working with cars and stuff. Well, I succeeded at—let's see. The day before I was supposed—two days before I was supposed to install my work at Henri, I sprayed these huge pieces with polyester resin, and it melted them. Made them useless. I had to call Henri and tell her they all fell off the truck. That was it. That was it for my big break. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  She probably wasn't too happy. 
 JIM SANBORN:  She wasn't very happy. It was a really bad experience. So I never again showed with Henri. And we never spoke, you know, for many years. And so that was a bad experience. First experience was not very good. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  On the other hand, here you are, you're just out of graduate school and whatever, and you're going to get this gallery show—[01:18:00] 
 JIM SANBORN:  Oh, yes. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  —immediately with a prominent gallery. I mean not as— 
 JIM SANBORN:  And Ivan Karp loved it; he loved it. I mean he wanted to show it. But, you know, it wasn't going to be for a couple of years. It wasn't going to be for another year. And by that time I'd already melted the suckers. So it was like—and you can't hold onto a certain kind of imagery forever. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  And you couldn't replicate them. 
 JIM SANBORN:  I didn't want to. No, I couldn't do it. It wasn't part—I just couldn't do it. It was like old work, you know. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. Yes. Well, but it's amazing that two dealers wanted to show your work. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. That [inaudible]. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  That doesn't happen to artists that often. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Exactly. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  I mean, you know, fairly quickly. 
 JIM SANBORN:  So I was reinforced. Even though it didn't work, I was still getting some reinforcement, the reinforcement that I needed to get me out of the doldrums, to say the least. And out of the depression and all of that. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Well, maybe that thesis show also, you know, you said you hated going to openings as a kid but for different reasons. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Right. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  And maybe it brought up a lot of that, too. But it is also scary to have your life, your creative life on display. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. Totally. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Have you found since that when you're having a show, that it's very anxiety-provoking for you? 
 JIM SANBORN:  It got better. But I still have never really enjoyed going to openings. I knew—I realized fairly quickly that it was an absolute necessity for the career. And the only reason I did it was for the career—or to try to pick up girls or something. Never enjoyed it. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  For housekeeping purposes, when were you married, what years, if you can remember? 
 JIM SANBORN:  '71—one year. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Oh, okay. 
 JIM SANBORN:  To the day. [01:20:00] And I married a woman that I met when she was dating my roommate in college, undergraduate, at Randolph-Macon. My roommate was dating her when she was 13, and he didn't know it. He didn't realize. He thought she was older. She acted incredibly mature. I mean, she was an Army brat, extremely bright. So anyway, I got to know her, you know, and she was so beautiful and intelligent and acted, you know, extremely mature. And so I don't know how we met again at a party or something like that. By that time she was 18. And I married her when she was 19. And she was in fashion in New York at Tobé–Coburn, this thing on the Upper East Side; it was a fashion [school –JS]. Well, she stayed in Manhattan, and she spoke like three languages, and she got a job with ABC News. Quickly rose to being a producer at ABC. One of the first women producers at ABC. She ended up producing Barbara Walters. She was the head of ABC News in Boston. She became very big at ABC News. Then she produced Bill Moyers and Barbara Walters and various other people. But her whole life was completely taken up with a whistle around her neck and lots of cocaine. Because that's what young successful producers, that's the way they got ahead. [01:22:00] And it was especially hard as a woman. And so she worked— But she was still very bright and very good at her job and rose very quickly. But was completely into that world. And I was completely into making sculpture. And both of us were very young. So it just didn't work out. We both went our separate ways. And we're very good friends to this day and have kept in touch all these years, and she's a very smart lady. But we just couldn't live together. Too young. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Yes. And going in different directions. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Going in different directions, 1971. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  So you—when you came back, were you living with your parents? Or did you have your own place here? 
 JIM SANBORN:  No, I was living with my parents. And when I came back from Randolph-Macon—from Pratt—in a bad state, I was staying with my parents. Stayed with my parents a lot. I stayed in my dad's studio when he wasn't necessarily working in it. I stayed there. And right. I was staying with them, and then I got married. We looked at a house in Falls Church, Virginia, through '71. And then I got a job at Montgomery College in Rockville, Maryland, teaching sculpture. And part time, I think—part time to begin with and maybe a year full time. Didn't enjoy that much. Made a whole series of pieces using a machine shop at Montgomery College. [01:24:00] Aluminum and glass pieces that detected changes in relative humidity. Basically they would fog up or clear up. I mean that's basically—I did these pieces, and they were polished aluminum and glass. And they got me my first fellowship and exhibition at Virginia Museum, my first major show. But prior to that—let's see. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Well, that's—well, let's just discuss this for a minute. Because that early work is certainly in the direction you were going to go. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  And how did that happen that you really changed your approach, your materials, your direction? 
 JIM SANBORN:  New York. Being close to New York and the contemporary art world and what people were doing at the time. The Minimalists. I liked the Minimal period. I liked the early environmentalists. The artists were working with, you know, simple materials. If you need a restroom, we've got one in here. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Okay, I'm just going to pause. [Audio break.] So anyway we were talking about teaching sculpture at Montgomery College in Rockville. And what was the content of the class? And were there any interesting students or dedicated students? 
 JIM SANBORN:  [01:26:00] I taught a course in three-dimensional design, art appreciation courses, and sculpture. My design classes and my—actually my design classes, I did wacky things with the students that I guess annoyed the other professors or whatever. I wasn't invited back to Montgomery College after my full, after the one—I did one full-time thing, but was not invited back for a variety of reasons. The main reason was that I would spend most of my time at the machine shop, and I had significant success as far as having shows and making a lot art in the different departments. And not hanging out with the other teachers who were going to class in coat and tie. I mean it was like high school. I mean it felt like high school. And I didn't relate to the other people at all. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Because they didn't act like artists. 
 JIM SANBORN:  No, they didn't act like artists. It felt like high school teaching. I mean it was like—and I did crazy things like taping up whole hallways with string and all this other wacky stuff, which they couldn't relate to very well. And I opened up a plastics laboratory in one of the restrooms where we did fiberglass work. And I think the smell—they didn't appreciate the smell either. So I tried doing all of these things. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  The kids must have loved you. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. I got along very well with the students. And some of them have done fairly well. I mean they aren't recognizable in the art world. But they've done well in DC as far as starting some really edgy music, you know, things. And doing edgy things in DC, which is good. [01:28:00] And I know them after all these years. But generally Montgomery College is basically high school, and the students aren't—it was a two-year college, and the students were the kinds of students that you wouldn't be able to follow later [inaudible]. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Now, what was this artist-in-residence in Glen Echo Park [MD]. What does that mean? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. Right after Montgomery College—actually during Montgomery College—after I got married—I got married and got divorced. I was at Montgomery College. I probably was living—Oh, I lived on this—after the house in Falls Church and I got divorced, I rented a little college on an estate in McLean, Virginia, right across from the entrance to CIA Headquarters. And it was on the Kennedy Estate. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. Robert. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. A portion of that estate. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Is that Hickory Hills or something? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Maybe. Yes, I think that's what it was. Something like that. And I was sort of the artist, you know. It was inexpensive, and I built a studio there, and I made sculpture there for maybe a year, year and a half. Then I was summarily booted out because they were going to develop the property into these grotesque McMansions out there. Which ultimately that's what happened. And then right after that at Montgomery College I met a couple—the guy was teaching ceramics. They had a farm in Frederick, Maryland—outside of Frederick, Maryland—Middletown, Maryland. [01:30:00] And I moved up there, built a studio in a barn there. Made larger sculpture there in this barn in Frederick for about a year and a half—or maybe just a year, whatever it was. They did ceramics; had big kilns and everything. It was a pretty interesting period. But it was pretty far away, and it was hard to get anybody to look at my work. So right after that, after I lived there, I heard about this thing in Glen Echo starting up. So I applied to be an artist-in-residence at Glen Echo Park. At the time the jury consisted of Anne Truitt, and she got me in there. She really liked what I was doing. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  What were you making then? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Well, I mean I was still working with the glass and the humidity and this other stuff. So it was kind of edgy, conceptually-based work. And I was able to get Virginia Commission on the Arts and NEA [National Endowment for the Arts] grants and things like this. And so I was able to support myself with that. So I started— When I went to Glen Echo, I was offered the Crystal Pool, which is an old swimming pool at Glen Echo, over which there were great riots during segregation. It was a segregated pool, and Glen Echo was an amusement park. An old amusement park. Previously it was a center of the Chautauqua. In the 1800s it was a Chautauqua center for the arts. [01:32:00] And then that was taken over and more or less built on top of it by Glen Echo Park, the amusement park. And it was an amusement park for many years. 
 So I was given the area underneath the Crystal Pool, which is a huge swimming pool. But around the pool, underneath the top paving around the pool, was 5,000 square feet of fairly interesting studio space. It had huge filter tanks in it and diving boards for tables. They made tables out of diving boards, these huge, aquamarine diving boards that became the tables in the studio. And then in one of the areas I built a foundry and had large-capacity foundry for pouring metal. I taught metal casting for eight years in Glen Echo Park and ran a foundry. And that's how I supported myself. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  And how did you know how to—I mean had you learned metal casting? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Remember that guy from Randolph-Macon College, that lived in the mill. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Jack. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Jack Witt. Had his own furnace that he had built, and he did metal casting. So I got into it and made some large aluminum castings, very similar to the big Styrofoam things I'd carved. I mean clones but made out aluminum, highly-polished, these huge highly-polished things. The thing about Glen Echo was it's a national park. And as a national park, I figured that, well, maybe there's some way to get access to government surplus materials. So I started—I did some research, and I discovered a way to gain access to all the federal government excess material to make art out of. [01:34:00] Now this is like—I mean myself and Raya Bodnarchuk, who's a sculptor in Washington. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  What did you say that name was? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Raya, R-A-Y-A. The last name is B-O-D-N-A-R-C-H-U-K. Raya and I were at Glen Echo. She was a sculptor, and I was a sculptor, and we ended up living—we lived together for about three years at Glen Echo, and we shared the studio for eight years. And I got this thing going where we could take—I got a truck, and we could actually take semi-trailers to the naval shipyard in Norfolk and have them filled with everything imaginable. We could have taken spacecraft. Literally they had spacecraft there. You could get anything that a sculptor ever wanted. There was just acres of metal: brand-new sheets of aluminum, huge chunks of metal, propellers the size of the building, every imaginable thing you ever wanted as a sculptor you could have for nothing. Zero! 
 And so we went to the naval shipyard in Philadelphia, the naval shipyard in Norfolk, and I started collecting these massive amounts of metal. And it made me into a Constructivist. All of a sudden, you know, you're working with small bits of metal and glass and minor materials because you can't afford stuff on a big-scale. And then all of a sudden, within a year, you could build anything you wanted to build out of just endless materials. So we'd go around, you know, and collecting this stuff. And then I started making large outdoor sculptures. [01:36:00] 
 At the time there weren't that many people—there were a small group of artists nationally: Nancy Holt, Beverly Pepper, and some other artists who were doing public art. But it wasn't a very big group at the time. And really one of the first public art programs was in Seattle. And I remember, you know, trying to put a portfolio together. I knew that I couldn't make public art unless I had made some public art. I mean I wouldn't get commissions if I couldn't make public art. So I started with all this infinite amount of metal and with proceeds from—I did bronze casting for other artists. Generally pretty terrible stuff. But I got some interesting commissions. Actually my friend Jack Witt—I did a large commission for him and charged him for it, whatever. And other artists I did large bronze castings for. I did a restoration of the Minute Man statue for the Naval Museum. I made castings of Smoky the Bear to be given to the park rangers that put out the most forest fires. Or whatever. 
 But it supported me well enough that I could start making large artworks. I'd put them on the back of my truck, take them out to a contemporary office park or large grassy area in front of minimal building that I liked. Plop them on the grass on a Sunday afternoon. And photograph it like they'd bought it. And then pick it up with security guards chasing me, literally chasing me away. And put it back in my truck and take it back. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  [Laughs] So you were going around Washington or Baltimore? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. Well, I remember I used GEICO. GEICO campus in Bethesda was a new building at the time. [01:38:00] It had a big grass area. And I used GEICO several times. But I made these huge pieces out of metal. And then I'd have it rolled, you know. I'd polish it [inaudible]. I'd do all this stuff. And I'd taken them somewhere. None of them were ever sold. They were all basically to build up a portfolio doing large-scale public art. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Well, I mean I realize it was truly plop art, and it was going to be de-plopped. 
 JIM SANBORN:  That's right. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  So it was spurious. 
 JIM SANBORN:  That's right. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Did you have any sense of what public art was other than at this moment, what you're discussing is large and maybe a decorative add-on to the building? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. I mean at that point in time, I mean short of some artists that— I guess Dennis Oppenheim was doing some big outdoor pieces. Again, I said Nancy Holt. Who else was it? 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Of course di Suvero had some. 
 JIM SANBORN:  I mean of course di Suvero was doing large pieces, large outdoor pieces. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Was Storm— 
 JIM SANBORN:  Well, Storm King had started like just when—Hutchinson left, Hutchinson Gallery, and then went up to New York and started opening sculpture parks. Storm King started after that sometime. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. Yes. 
 JIM SANBORN:  But at the time, my pieces were minimal, metal constructions. And I did those sort of minimal—large, minimal, metal constructions. And I built a portfolio of that. While simultaneously doing other metal constructions that had content to them and had some sort of intellectual basis. [01:40:00] Based largely on a trip I took in '77 to Egypt and prior to that, they were sort of minimal constructions that related somehow to—they were temple-like and futuristic cityscapes or whatever. But they were very simple, minimal—because I had an infinite supply of metal. And make whatever I wanted to make out of this metal and have curators in and try to get shows. 
 I remember at Glen Echo—I mean, there were some major disasters, too. I mean, I was doing the public art thing. And then simultaneously doing the gallery-museum thing. Which is what I have continued to do for the rest of my life, which was to do two parallel—two separate things, and one doesn't necessarily relate to the other and never has. The intellectual basis for public art isn't as strong as it is for my museum and gallery work. And so the two worlds are separate. I mean, you can make public art and be completely unknown in the museum-gallery world. And you can be known in the museum-gallery world—the two worlds are separate. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Well, one is more architectural because it's involved more with architecture. 
 JIM SANBORN:  It involves compromise. It involves working with clients' whims. It involves all this other stuff. But it doesn't have anything to do necessarily with what I consider to be high art. Okay? So basically the public art is a way, a method for me to support my gallery-museum work. And that worked very well for many years. And I made significant money from the public art, to the point where I didn't have to teach anymore. [01:42:00] But so when I was at Glen Echo, I supported myself—I didn't sell much public art, but I was building up this portfolio, slowly building it up, building it up. And I also then at Glen Echo started working in stone. But it wasn't carved, it was split stone. And I started splitting and making very simply geometric, geological forms. They were science-based geological forms. Prior to the science-based, geological-like tableau, I was doing—these things were things that were inspired before that, like Egypt and the archaeology. 
 So after I left graduate school, I more or less decided that if I'm going to make anything that's my own, I've got to somehow base it on my previous experience. And I decided what I would do would be—I could do as much as I wanted about archaeology and do an end-run around the whole system. And be an archaeologist or deal with archaeological stuff without having to get a doctorate and do all that other stuff.  So I could do stuff with archaeology. I could do it with as much science. I could do all of those things that I wanted to do but was crippled by my lack of mathematics. So I was never able to do the mathematics. As a result, I could never be a science person or a scientist or whatever. So I could circumvent that by being an artist. That way I could accomplish my goals without having to deal with the usual routine of getting there. 
 So in the '70s the work was a mix of these futuristic—[01:44:00]—they were sort of, again, I mentioned futuristic cities, but they were archaeologically based. So they were minimalized. They were minimal kinds of metal constructions. But the public art was just metal constructions without the archaeological inspiration. Which to me meant that they had less content. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  And the stone pieces, are those outdoor big pieces? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. So the stone pieces start in the mid-'70s. And I'm working at Glen Echo. And I build this huge stone-splitting machine where I can split large blocks of stone. I built a small machine also. And so I built these two machines so I could—in 1977, I guess, I started working with the stone and doing these geological tableaus. And I got major grants from the NEA and other places based on that work. So I was getting a lot of good, positive feedback about that from the stonework. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. Does Noguchi figure in here at all or anything like that? Or any others? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Well, I admired some Noguchi work. But I thought Noguchi was passé. I mean I think because it was related more to—it was related more to the classic stonecarvers. At least his public work I felt had some promise because it was—he took more chances with it. But the carved work was very—too traditional for me; it was very traditional work. While I was at Glen Echo I had an assistant, a woman who worked for me named Nizette Brennan. [01:46:00] And Nizette had worked for Noguchi in his studio in Italy. And I had been working with the split stone exclusively. It was nothing like what Noguchi worked in. And I had shows at a couple of museums. I think I showed this split stone work at the Virginia Museum and several other places and was doing fairly well with it. And Nizette said, "Well, Isamu's coming to town, so let's go out and spend the day." And so she brought him up in my studio, and he loved the work. You know he—I was very—I mean I was feeling paranoid that somebody like Noguchi picks up on what you're doing, it's the kiss of death. I mean I'd had other artists that had borrowed ideas from me, and I was very paranoid. 
 So I was very selective about what I showed him and what I told him. It seemed very strange, but I think a lot of artists, if they're working with ideas and stuff that quite a few people are working with, they're very proprietary about it. I didn't want to take any chances with this. And so we talked about stone and the way we each related to stone. And how, you know, I related differently to stone than the way he related to stone. And we just spent the day, I mean, you know, talking about stone and all of that. And we went down—I think he had installed a piece at the East Building or something, and we went down to Washington and worked on that. And that was really the only experience I had with him. I got a call from him about a couple of weeks, a month later, about some of my stone suppliers and stuff like this, you know. But we related pretty well. And, you know, it was an interesting experience to do it, you know to talk to him and everything. [01:48:00] Anyway, that's the only— 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Well, that's pretty amazing, though. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes, it's pretty amazing. I mean it was cool. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  I mean that he wanted to talk to you without—I mean he was talking to you as clearly a superior. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes, he really liked what I was doing because he realized I was serious about it. It was a type of stonework that he had thought about or he hadn't dealt with before. Because, you know, it was entirely different. And there were geological representations of things I mean, you know, and whether they were earthquakes or landslides and things like this, they were pieces which involved literal—they were representational, but they were representational of geological events. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Do you remember what he said about how he related to stone? 
 JIM SANBORN:  No. Honestly. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  And how did you explain how you related to stone? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Gee. Stone to me was just a medium. I think he had a more sensuous relationship with stone, in the way that Michelangelo might have a sensuous relationship with stone. I certainly know that Nizette, his assistant, did work almost exactly like Noguchi's, you know. And it was very derivative of his work. So I sort of saw his work around all the time because her work was around. And I'm pretty sure that that's the way he felt about it. I might have described it at the time, but I didn't—it was an interesting event, but it didn't seem as significant as it should have been. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Well, of course, he had that place in Shikoku, which was a whole island of stone carvers. And he went there to push and move the stones around. [01:50:00] I mean, the stone was the reason he went there. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Oh, absolutely. And I—I mean, you know, just the fact that I was taking stone, and I wasn't putting a chisel to it at all. I was just splitting it. I mean, it could've been some other material. It could've been chunks of ceramic or even chunks of Styrofoam that I was sawing. But because it was stone, you know— I mean the thing about it was is that I started looking around. I guess I wanted to work with stone in a different way. And I saw a couple of houses that were made out of multi-colored stone. These were stone veneer on houses, strips of stone almost like brick but it was actually stone, in all different, amazing colors, you know. And it just blew me away. It was hideous because they were mixing it all up into these hideous 1950s, '60s, things, you know. It was just grotesque. But I saw the stone, and I said, Gee whiz! Is that fake? Is that color real? Is that like—what is that? You know. 
 So I located the quarry. After a lot of research, I found out where the stone came from. And it was a sandstone quarry in Ohio. One place, Briar Hill Stone Company, in this one area of Ohio that had stone, a sandstone, that had been geologically endowed with many hues from blues, greens, red, brown, the whole gamut; all colors of stone coming from an area of a group of quarries in maybe 10 square miles. It was a remarkable thing. And nobody had messed with it. No artist had really used it or anything, that I knew of. [01:52:00] And it was just an amazing discovery that they had this infinite amount of color in this stone. And so basically the way they built these houses, they'd have these wooden pallets, you know, four-by-four feet. And they'd have a conveyor belt would come by. And the conveyor belt had all these stones on it of all the different colors. They had one strip of stone that's gray, a strip of stone that's brown, a strip of stone that's blue, green, whatever. And the guys would try to put an equally mixed group on a pallet. Right? So that a stonemason could just mix them all up on the wall, and it'd be all even. Heaven forbid you make a house out of one color! It wouldn't—they never did. They took the stone, they mixed it all up in colors. 
 So I said, now this is ridiculous. So I started having them make me pallets of one color, you know; so I'd have one brown and one bright red and one gray and one whatever. And so I had a truck, and I was able to bring like five pallets at a time back to my studio in Glen Echo. So I started making these stone constructions using just one color. And it was very evocative, and it looked—I mean I did very well with that body of work. And I started showing with a woman here in town named Diane Brown. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Oh, wait a minute! I remember her from many years ago. But I think we're getting ahead of ourselves there on that. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Well, '79 was my first show with Diane. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Okay. Well, I wanted to ask you two questions here, is that: you stopped, even though you had all the free material, you stopped using it? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Did you ever go back again for it? 
 JIM SANBORN:  [01:54:00] Well, I guess this [inaudible] stone distracted me to such an extent that I then— I did use it for my— I did two, my first two major public art projects, one was for the City of Baltimore, this is '77; and also for the City of Charleston, West Virginia. They were large projects. And one piece ended up being about 90 feet long and 30 feet wide and 20 feet high. The other one was about 60 feet by 60 feet by 60 feet by about 30 feet high—20 feet high. And they were both my representations of cities. They were giant constructions as if they were pyramids—Egyptian constructions along the Nile River. Both of them were adjacent to rivers. One was the Elk River in Charleston, West Virginia. The other was the Patapsco River in Baltimore. And they both—each piece was gigantic, and they both related to the river they were near, in the way an Egyptian pyramid relates to the river that they're near. And these were the first two big projects. And each one took me about two years to three years to complete. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  I want—actually it's kind of funny because when you say pyramids, what I was going to ask you was I see that you were at the Pyramid Galleries and Ramon Osuna . 
 JIM SANBORN:  I went—yes, but he and I never got along at all. The only time I went to Pyramid was when Andy Warhol went there. And I might have shown something. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Yes, there was this show called Eight Sculptors . 
 JIM SANBORN:  That's right. That wasn't because it was Ramon's show; it was because Howard Fox maybe chose it or—he had another curator choose it. [01:56:00] Right? So I don't think of it as being whatever. Yes. But it was only—yes, it had nothing—I didn't have a relationship only with Ramon who named the gallery that. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Okay. Well, oh, I know that. I just thought that was— Well, I guess what I was going to say is also I think you began to get involved or did some work with Washington Project for the Arts? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes, the first—my first one-person show was the WPA. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  And was that when Jock Reynolds was there? 
 JIM SANBORN:  No, that's when Alice Denney was there. This predated Jock Reynolds. Jock Reynolds never showed my work. He didn't like what I did basically. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  So Alice Denney was—I'm not sure if she's still alive. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes, she's still alive. 
 MS BERMAN:  She's quite legendary. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes, she's legendary in Washington. That's right. So I had my first show with Alice. Just barely got these big polished metal pieces in the door—just barely made it in there. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  I mean what I was also leading to was, starting in the mid-'70s, was there—do you feel that there was an art scene in Washington? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes, I mean there was. You know Pyramid was there, and then next door to that was Max Protetch. And Max—I remember one day I went in to see Max, and I had a polished metal piece photographed and polished, some of these polished metal pieces I'd done. Which in some ways were a regression on my part. But I did them. They just predated the archaeological minimal metal pieces. They just predated that. They were kind of left over from Pratt in a way. I don't remember when this was; mid-'70s I guess. And I went to see him with some photographs. I went upstairs, and Max was living like a college student. He looked like a college student. He had a mattress on the floor. He was living upstairs in the gallery. [01:58:00] And there was a mattress on the floor and bunch of his crud in the corner. But then he had a couch, right? He had a couch. And behind the couch was this long minimal painting. And I went in there, and I said, "Hi, how are you doing?" And he says, "I'm doing fine. I want you to meet Gene Davis. This is Gene." Gene was sitting on the couch, and I sat down next to Gene. And he said, "Be careful!" I started sitting on the couch. "Don't put your head back! Don't put your head back." That's a very expensive Robert Morris on the wall there. Puts you on edge immediately, right? It was sort of like [inaudible]. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Yes. 
 JIM SANBORN:  So all of a sudden I have to show my work to Max and Gene Davis at the same time. You know it was like—so I dragged the portfolio out, and I'm showing him this stuff, you know. And I think—the comment was, from both of them—and I was not that old, you know I should have—when I look back on it, I probably should have known better. But the comment was, you know, it's sort of like, I made this piece, you know. I thought it was—I was referring to galleries too much as places to sell work. Now it's true they are. They're places where you sell work. But it was as if I was making my sculpture to sell it. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. 
 JIM SANBORN:  And so the comment was: Don't worry about whether you can sell it. Just make your art the way you want to make it. That's what it came down to [what] the meeting was. He didn't show my work. Protetch  didn't show my work. He showed very little interest in it. Some interest—but the work I was doing at that time—I can understand why now—but whatever. So that's what it was like showing it to Max at the time. [02:00:00] And so a couple years later—a couple years later I started applying for GSA projects. Our architect was Don Thallaker, who was there. And I get a call from Max Protetch after he moved to New York and opened up his gallery. He said, "Hey, Jim, I've seen some stuff written about your work. And I know you've got a lot of grants and stuff. I'd really like to represent your work, and here's a contract." He gives me this contract to sign. Right? He's got this contract and everything. So the next day I get this call from GSA saying, "Hey, Jim, you're short-listed for this $200,000 project." I can't remember where it was. In New York City or something. And I've got this contract from [Protetch –JS]. Now I've got this $200,000 commission. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Contract from Protetch, not Gene. 
 JIM SANBORN:  No, no, no, no. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Okay. Just for the tape. I know what you meant. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Contract with Protetch, and I get this GSA commission the next day. Geez, are they related? Well, you know, so I find out, after a little snooping, that Protetch was on the panel of the GSA project. And he wants a cut of the $200[000]. And that really, you know, sort of like, okay, so this really is the way it works, isn't it? Isn't this amazing to do it this way. And anyway, sure, I was happy with the contract. [02:02:00] And sure, I didn't get the GSA. And sure, I never showed in New York. But it was just really stunning, you know. It was very stunning, you know. But it was—it's amazing, I was very disillusioned by the whole project. Anyway, so that's something. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. 
 JIM SANBORN:  When I was at Glen Echo and running the foundry, there was an artist named Yuri Schwebler who was a very up-and-coming Russian artist at the time. And there was this young guy, who was the director of the Corcoran [Gallery of Art], named Walter Hopps. Walter was very influential in the art world, who was the director of the Corcoran. And Walter and Yuri were drinking buddies. And Yuri was notoriously insane, crazy, but a very good sculptor. And he had been selected for the Paris Biennale. So Yuri comes to my studio, and I had bailed out Yuri from jail once and kept him from killing somebody once. And thought I had done him a few favors. He comes to my studio and asks me if I would cast his bronze plumb bob for the Paris Biennale. And he said, "I'll tell you, Jim, if you can do this for me, then Walter Hopps and I are going to do you a lot of favors in the art world." And I said, "Yuri, I mean, you and I both know that you can't guarantee my career by my casting some plumb bobs for the Paris Biennale, you know." That's basically what I said to him. And I said, "Well, let me think about it for a week and figure out if I can do it financially." Because he was expecting me to—all the expenses in exchange for art world favors. [02:04:00] 
 My delay of three days got, you know, ticked him off to such an extent that he told Walter that I was trying to rip off his work. And that single event set my career back to the mid-'70s. It set my career back 10 years, because of Walter Hopps. Then the people that I knew—the curators that I was currying favor with—regarded Walter as God. And so Walter started saying to people that my work is derivative of Yuri Schwebler's work—and it wasn't if you really looked at it. But all of a sudden there was a dampening of art world interest in my work. Because of my reticence about all art world favors. After my Protetch experience, I was a little, you know, weirded out by the whole thing. Is it really that weird and strange? 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Well, I see that you have—you were in group shows, area shows at the Corcoran in '74. 
 JIM SANBORN:  That's right. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  And '78. 
 JIM SANBORN:  That's right. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  So I'm not sure when this event would have occurred. 
 JIM SANBORN:  It was close to that period of time. But these are area exhibitions. Walter might have been at the Corcoran then. But there were guest curators. And I don't remember who they were. I mean who knows? They could've been friends of my dad's—David Scott and Joshua Smith and all those other museum people. You know, I was doing interesting—I was doing those giant constructions that looked like cities. So the work was still okay. And I got in those shows. But I really felt as if I would've gotten much further if that incident hadn't happened. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. But what were you supposed to do? Just be manipulated by him and cast that stuff when you would've felt horrible? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. I couldn't do that. That's what happened. [02:06:00] But I didn't realize how badly it could—you know, I didn't realize how badly I could be injured by something like that. I couldn't believe that somebody would actually do that. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. And it also seems so absurd. I mean first of all this person has disappeared from view. No one ever hears from him again. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. Right. You know it's like— I know. I mean he moved to New York, and he had some shows in New York. But, you know— 
 AVIS BERMAN:  He didn't make it. 
 JIM SANBORN:  He didn't make it. He killed himself. But it's just—I know. Yes. Because you end up with that crowd. I mean, you know, Walter was at the time, he was doing very well. But he was notoriously difficult to deal with. And getting on your bad side, getting on his—whatever. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Well, on the other hand, you can't go about doing that all the time because it's not going to work, and you're going to feel like crap. Also, as you say, you just couldn't believe people could be that evil to do that. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Right. I mean, that combined with the Protetch thing made me very gun shy of anybody—of that whole realm, you know, of the art world. And it sort of reinforced my [inaudible] so I sort of felt like I wanted to be by myself more often. Or at least try to get curators that I could trust, you know. And the curator that ended up being most influential in my life, you know, in that period was Howard Fox at the Hirschhorn. And he later went to LA County Museum. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. Yes. 
 JIM SANBORN:  And Howard helped me immensely and put me in several shows. And that really, you know, allowed me to rise, you know, despite Walter. And even Walter put me in a show a year later in the '80s. But, you know, I couldn't even see the man. I couldn't even—I didn't even want to see him. [02:08:00] After that experience I never saw, physically, never saw Walter, until he was in his—I don't know what age he was when he died. But it was just two years before he died, I saw him at a Hirshhorn opening. He came up to me and said, "Hey, Jim Sanborn! Is that you?" You know it was like even then it was like, weird. Why Walter would be, you know, coming to me like this—you know, the Hirschhorn had bought one of my pieces, and it was sitting up in front of the museum, you know. It was up on a slide of the wall. All of a sudden Walter, in his dotage in his last year, figured out, oh, hmm, not bad, after all. But this is all terribly sour grapes to be putting on tape. But anyway— 
 AVIS BERMAN:  It's not sour grapes. 
 JIM SANBORN:  It's all part—it's what forms you, you know. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Well, and the other thing that's scary is because the art world was smaller here, that one person could have so much power. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Absolutely. Yes. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  I mean that doesn't—I mean in the old days maybe [Clement] Greenberg had that much power. But there's no one—and probably not even in Washington anymore—nobody has that much power; one person doesn't have it. Maybe I'm wrong about Washington. But I can't believe that that's so, that there's no one— 
 JIM SANBORN:  There is now. Richard Koshalek. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Okay. [They laugh.] 
 JIM SANBORN:  I mean there was a little bit before in Ned Rifkin. But Rifkin is like— I mean, you know I ended up befriending some of these people in very high places. And it helped certainly. You know I played the game, you know. And I guarantee part of the reason I've done as well as I have is because I began playing the game—reluctantly, very reluctantly. But I started playing the game socially. [02:10:00] And it paid off to a degree. But anyway— 
 AVIS BERMAN:  This is probably a good time to stop for today. So thank you. 
 JIM SANBORN:  No problem. 
 [END OF AAA_sanbor09_6589_m.] 
 AVIS BERMAN:  This is Avis Berman recording Jim Sanborn on July 15, 2009, for the GSA Archives of American Art Oral History Project, in his house in Washington, D.C. I want to start out just with a couple of housekeeping—yesterday there were a couple of things that you said and I didn't pick up on. So I just want to go back and finish those before we start up. And you had said that the Library of Congress would become very important in your later work. And why don't you elaborate on that now? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. I mean let me preface this by something I didn't bring up necessarily yesterday. It seems as if generally my artistic life, career, et cetera, is divided into roughly 10-year increments. And I seem to work with subjects for a period—a fairly lengthy period—and then jump to a different kind of thing. Sometimes entirely, but they're usually related with some sort of common denominator. So through the 1970s my work was largely constructivist, minimal. Dealt with things that were architecturally inspired. And were basically derived mostly from archaeological sources. And then in the 1980s, I began working with the forces of nature. The pieces were largely geologically inspired—some paleontological incursions in there; i.e., I included fossils in some of the works and some Greek mythology and things like this. And so we had the '70s was one thing, the '80s is another thing. And then the '90s became the secrecy stuff. [00:02:00] 
 The Library of Congress during all of this was influential—and of course my dad was working there the entire time—in that I was familiar with the library. I was familiar with the stacks and the collections. And when I started introducing content into my work, it became a valuable resource. And one of the main reasons I actually left New York and came to DC was the ease with which I could research my projects, which was important. And get support from the Library of Congress and the general government—you know the government sources. The things that were available to me here were greater than they were in New York. Perhaps they aren't greater in actuality. But they were greater for me because I was familiar with it. So I came back to a familiar system of content-making and research, which was very necessary to what I did in the subsequent years. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. And was your father able to be helpful? I mean, as you progressed in the— 
 JIM SANBORN:  Only in that they were completely and utterly supportive with everything that I did. Being an only child was very helpful in that. And being artists, both of my parents, artists and having artistic mentalities and spending time with artists and entertaining artists, I was in an environment that was very just generally totally supportive of what I was doing. Which was great. But also, though, the work that my father was doing was much more conservative and very different from the work that I was doing. So I had to sort of educate them in the higher, more contemporary, Conceptual art kinds of things that I was doing. And they came along just fine. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Yes. Now you also had said that you had up to a certain point, how you had supported yourself through Glen Echo. [00:04:00] When were you able to make a living from your art alone? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Well, Glen Echo ended around 1980-81. The Park Service decided to condemn the building that I used as a studio for all those years. My 5,000-square-foot studio was bulldozed because it was sort of falling down around me. It was a very difficult transition. And I was saved in a couple of ways. Right about that time an old family friend, whom my father had known in Oglebay Park, when he was the WPA person there, a fellow named Gordon Hanes. Gordon Hanes invented the seamless stocking and Hanes underwear. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right! 
 JIM SANBORN:  Okay? So Gordon Hanes for some reason—and Gordon was an art collector. And Gordon in his, just, art collecting somehow came across my name. Or saw me somehow. Saw information about me and called up and said, "Are you Jimmy Sanborn, Herbert James Sanborn's son?" And I said yes. And he said, "Well, I've seen some of your sculpture"—the large stone constructions that I was doing at the time. And the first one I actually had done was for the Baltimore Metro System in the 1980s, and for which I built this huge splitting machine so I could build several of these big things. So Gordon called me up and said, "Listen, Jim, I'm coming to visit. I want to see your work." So I'm at my studio in Glen Echo, my run-down building, and my other artists' assistants, and the other artists at Glen Echo watch this big limousine pull into the parking lot and pull up to the front of the studio, and Gordon and Copey Hanes came into the studio. And just a really wonderful, simpatico—wonderful people. [00:06:00] They're the people whose home became SECCA, Southeast Center for Contemporary Art. And Gordon's bedroom, he said, was the offices and— 
 So he was very influential in that southern contemporary art scene. And he commissioned me outright to do a large piece for his front yard. He had also commissioned a replica of one of the Easter Island heads. Well, actually he had moved one, something, one of the original things to his front yard. So there was going to be my piece at one side of the house, between the house and the lake, and one piece, this other piece, on the other side of the house. So he commissioned me. I was at a point where I was losing my Glen Echo studio, and he paid me the entire commission up front. And that enabled me to put a down payment on my warehouse studio that I had for 22 years, and which I lived in for those 22 years and made art in. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  And where was that? 
 JIM SANBORN:  It was in Northeast Washington, D.C. And so that really got me going. And then—so I worked that way for a couple of years in the early '80s in that building and realized that I was getting kind of lonely by myself in this warehouse building in Northeast. So I took a job at the University of Maryland more or less to gain social interaction. And I taught there just for two and a half years, I guess. And got the CIA commission. And the CIA commission amount was large enough that I, with tremendous angst, decided to leave the job at the University of Maryland and devote my entire life to just making public art. And I'd gotten actually, a little earlier than that, a project, [00:08:00] yes, for the City of Baltimore and for Charleston, West Virginia, in the late '70s, up until about '80. And so by that time did have a pretty decent portfolio of large-scale works, that I was able to compete with some of the larger names who were in the public art realm. So those events all conspired to allow me to do that then full time. And that's what I've done since. I haven't taught since '85—'86, I guess. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Okay. We'll go back to some of those other pieces. But I just wanted to get—because that's always an interesting question about how those things fall out. And then yesterday you also said that when you were at Oxford finding that hidden passage was very influential. And I just wondered if you might elaborate on that. 
 JIM SANBORN:  It was influential when I did Kryptos . Shall I discuss that aspect of it? 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Yes, you might as—right. Okay. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. One of my favorite—there are several favorite texts of mine. One was Howard Carter's notebooks describing the opening of King Tut's tomb. And the other one is Heinrich Schliemann's *Troy *[ Memoirs of Heinrich Schliemann: A documentary portrait drawn from his autobiographical writings, letters, and excavation reports ], of which I have an original copy from the late 1800s. And those giant excavations and amazing discoveries of cultures were really profoundly—profoundly interested me much like—you know, I mean excavating and finding something that's been hidden for millennia is a very exciting thing. And whether it's an arrowhead, a simple arrowhead in a field, [00:10:00] or whether it's an entire tomb that's been out of view for millennia, it's a wonderful thing to discover something that nobody's seen before and that you can actually—tangible evidence of the past. And I'm fascinated by the past in general. 
 I am really not that interested in post-colonialism, you know, when the United States is colonized. I'm far more interested in prior to that, you know, prior to the 16th century, 15th century, whatever. I'm much more interested in that period than I am more contemporary history. Unless it involves Native American situations which I can still, you know, use and document and use languages from. So that event and then, of course, the Dead Sea Scrolls, which were again something lost, then found. These objects being hidden and then found are fascinating to me. They also link together with the nature thing, which is where I was able to—if I were to do something that involved magnetism and the earth's magnetic field, the earth's magnetic field is invisible; and so I basically would work with compasses or lodestones in some way to visualize that field. So in nature, and also by making a geological tableau, I more or less took up out of the ground and put on display the wonders of what nature was able to do. So again, it was more or less an excavation in geology, a geological sort of excavation, and it presented something that had been hidden from view in geological terms for millions of years. So I was very much into this whole thing, beginning, I guess, really in the 1980s but before that, about exposing things unseen. [00:12:00] 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Yes, it's the researcher's temperament, too. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Right. Exactly. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  The aha! 
 JIM SANBORN:  Opening the book, whatever, the aha. Exactly. The aha was all things to me. So when I was more or less short-listed for this GSA commission, I was short-listed because of my experience on working with things held secret. So they made a conceptual leap and determined that I might be capable of working with secrecy of mankind or humankind as well. And so for me the challenge was the same; they dealt with the same issues, albeit the commissioning agency, not GSA but the CIA, was a far more complex decision, you know, to do the piece or not do the piece, than I thought it would be in the beginning. So that's—and in doing Kryptos , I brought up this hidden/not hidden thing when I wrote the plain text for Kryptos . You know, I included an entry of Howard Carter's discovery of the tomb. And also other writing that I composed that related to mysteries as yet undiscovered. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  I just should say for the tape—I'm not going to ask you about anything that hasn't been solved. Because it isn't even my interest anyway. It's your interest. 
 JIM SANBORN:  You wouldn't get anything out of me anyway. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  No, I know. But I'm just telling you. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Sure. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  But you're saying it [inaudible]. 
 JIM SANBORN:  But this is all stuff that I am familiar with now because I've just been writing all about it. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. 
 JIM SANBORN:  So I can be far more easily—I can talk more easily about it because it's more familiar in some ways. [00:14:00] 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Okay. Now we're going—oh, and one other question from yesterday: Did you really believe that when Noguchi came to your studio that he was going to really take your ideas? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  And during the— 
 JIM SANBORN:  Well, I'll tell you, from an artist's standpoint, and perhaps there are artists who don't think about it, but most of the ones that I speak to are very proprietary until their work is on the walls. Okay? When the work is on the wall, then, you know, unless somebody else has put the same work on the wall down the road, which is highly unlikely, that's your moment. That's the time that it becomes yours. But up to that time, most artists like their studios to be closed. I mean I know that Anne Truitt never allowed anybody in her studio. I have many artist friends who are very conscious of working in secrecy because they do not like their work borrowed by others. I have had assistants borrow my work in very blatant ways. I've had well-known artists absolutely steal my work to the point where it ends up in Time magazine and art magazines. And it's just—it's not whatever. But this is for artists who are making work—who are attempting to make work—that hasn't been made before. I—my primary driving force in doing what I do is to try to do something which hadn't been attempted. 
 And the fact that my work now, and for the last 10 years, has been more and more and more technical demonstrates that, okay, I'm going to try to do things that nobody else could pull off, as a way of distancing myself from other artists' work. So even if somebody sees it, they won't necessarily be able to do it because of the technical aspects of it are so difficult to do. [00:16:00] So that's what I've done. And I've been stung very badly in the past by artists I will not name. And they admit it. But it's like—I don't know if it was Da Vinci that said, you know—there's a wonderful quote about it, about stealing art or stealing an idea from somebody. And, you know, you just do it, you just do it with relish, okay, and you get more out of it. And I cannot remember the quote. The quote fails me. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Well, I don't know about that. But I do know that T.S. Eliot said, "Poor poets imitate, great poets steal." 
 JIM SANBORN:  Right, right. Well, that's very possible. And I've met quite a few artists—though, yes, when Noguchi came to my studio, I was paranoid. I was working in a style which is very distinctly different from his. Yet knowing Nizette, our mutual friend, had sent him some pictures of what I do—and she said that he was very interested in the work and really wanted to talk about it. So that was the main reason he came to the studio. So I was leery about that. But an assistant borrowing your work can't damage your career. An already-established, well-known artist steals your work, you're out of it. Forget it. You've got to start an entirely—you've got to start over. And I've seen this happen so many times. I mean I have a very good friend in Washington, who did fabulous paintings for 10 years, wonderful paintings. Keith Haring came along and really did the same paintings. They never met each other. I don't think they even saw each other's work. But he started doing it. And my friend was lost. I mean he was in the Guggenheim. He had showed in major exhibitions in New York. And all of a sudden Keith Haring just wiped him off the face of the earth. [00:18:00] And I couldn't, you know—so, yes, I was paranoid and still am paranoid. But less paranoid now because I know nobody would be crazy enough to do what I'm doing now. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. As the day wore on, were you more relaxed? 
 JIM SANBORN:  No, I was more afraid after because of his interest and his wanting to find out where that quarry was in Ohio where I got this amazing stone; because he had never seen anything like it in his life. And I did end up giving him the name of the quarry. I don't know if he ever used any of the material. I don't know. So I never saw him again. And Nisette and I became less than friends. So— 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Yes. Well, I think you probably would've seen by now if Noguchi had done something. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Probably. I haven't looked at any, you know— 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. 
 JIM SANBORN:  And I generally don't. I generally—it seems ridiculous—but I, as an artist, I generally don't study other artists' work. I don't look at other artists' work. I very rarely look at other artists' work unless it's an artist that I've known about for a while, I'm familiar with their work, and I enjoy the work, then I might go to the opening and do something like that. Or if we were good friends. Or, you know, if I find the work interesting. But I try—I sort of insulate myself from it because I don't necessarily want to be doing mainstream art. Mainstream in that a lot of people might be doing it, that type of art. You know I've always tried to be sort of a loner. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. Are you much of a museum-goer anymore? 
 JIM SANBORN:  No, not really. I'm much more of a nature absorber. I travel a tremendous amount. During the '80s and '70s and '80s I traveled internationally a lot, all through Indonesia and Borneo, around the world twice, India [00:20:00]; you know, very remote areas of Irian Jaya [Indonesia] and Sulawesi [Indonesia] and all these foreign areas that were very remote, in order to see and study tribal cultures as they were before Westernization. Now it's almost impossible to go to these places without seeing people on mopeds and wearing, you know, Grateful Dead T-shirts in the most remote parts of the world. So I'm so glad that I have those images to hold onto of what the past was like. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. I'm sure you went to Stonehenge when you were in England, and that's all— 
 JIM SANBORN:  I slept in Stonehenge, you know. And we could play all over the rocks. I have pictures of myself sitting on the rocks, which you can't do anymore. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Oh, you can't even get near it. 
 JIM SANBORN:  You can't get near it. So that was a great experience. Plus the very large outdoor pieces, the white chalk pieces on the sloping hillsides of mountains are also very important to me, as were the Nazca images in Peru and Macchu Picchu in—actually my early large commissions were inspired—I built some very large stone, a very large stone project for—at the same time I built the piece for the City of Baltimore, I built one in West Virginia. And I used huge blocks of granite. These were 50-ton blocks of granite. And I tried to—I fabricated and assembled them in the way that I believe the Incas manipulated their stones. And it was a gigantic scale. And in order to replicate that, to get that kind of impression, I built this huge temple kind of structure in West Virginia. An odd place, but— 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Well, I'm going to go to those actually in a few seconds. But I realize there was one more, the early travel, one more thing from yesterday. [00:22:00] You had mentioned that you had been to Egypt fairly early. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes, well, '77 was the first trip, and then I went again in '84, and I'm really glad I went in '77 because the tourism and the plastic bottles in the Nile, they wrecked it for me. [Laughs.] 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Well, the first time, did it disappoint you? And what was— 
 JIM SANBORN:  Oh, no. It was absolutely incredibly inspiring. I made one error that I went to Egypt before I went to Greece. It was the same trip. And I should've really gone to Greece first and then to Egypt. But that's—it's hard to explain why I would rather have gone that way. But I was just completely blown away by Egypt and the culture. And how in the tombs of the nobles and all of these things, you could still see the artists' fingerprints. You know, you could see their fingerprints on the works. And it was amazing to me that you have four or 5000-year-old pieces that are so fresh and brand new because they're in total darkness. The only way you can see them is with several little boys holding mirrors to see it with natural light. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Well, it also must have appealed to you because this was art—none of these things were ever expected to be seen again. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Well, yes. I mean again, you know, and then of course I saw *Tutankhamun's—*all the stuff that Howard Carter found at the Egyptian Museum when I was there. After that it traveled. But I was really able to see it when, you know, more or less—I felt like they'd just taken it out of the ground, because it was sitting in the same location as it was placed originally; hadn't moved. Which was fabulous. And the orientation of the works in the room were the same as they were in the tomb. And so that was really wonderful. And seeing the various temples. And then Abu Simbel, I think, was one of the most awe-inspiring things that I saw in scale. [00:24:00] The scale was so gigantic, it was something that to me was unimaginable. And the fact that it had been 10 years before moved in its entirety up to a higher location, you know, by being sawed up flawlessly, and moved flawlessly, was quite a stunning achievement in two ways. So that was wonderful also. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  I mean were you interested in how they were built, too, and all of that part? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Oh, yes, totally. And I had very specific ideas about the way they were built. I'm very much a debunker of, you know, myth and conjecture about the way the pyramids were built, you know. You know, I have no problem with the fact that they built them, not by aliens but by system. So people like Von Daniken and all of that crowd are very much on my no-read, ignore list. Yes, and I'm a sculptor, and I did everything I could to try to build work like they did, to emulate the way they did it. So that's why my work ended up like it was. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Okay. Well, let's talk about the first public pieces that you did and how you— And then I'll leave them apart from other ones because I think they were—because they were early, and they were different. And one was—which was first, the one in Baltimore or the one in Charleston, West Virginia? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Baltimore I think was first. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Now was that the metro system in Baltimore? 
 JIM SANBORN:  No, that's different. That was a stone piece. No, this was for the—it was along the* *Patapsco, and it was sort of east Baltimore near Brooklyn. Baltimore has a place called Brooklyn. And [inaudible] something like that. [00:26:00] And it was '77, and I was actually hired as a CETA employee. And that's how I was paid. And then Bethlehem Steel donated all the steel. And local concrete contractors donated all the concrete. And so I basically built the molds for the concrete. And then had the metal cut and welded on site for the piece. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Excuse me for moving stuff around. I'm just looking at my list. So how did you approach that, it being public, as opposed to how you would approach something in your studio? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Well, I always felt as if my public work was 10 years behind my gallery/museum work. Because in most cases it would take me 10 years to figure out how to make gallery work substantial enough to exist in the public environment. And I had early public pieces more or less destroyed. I mean I did—remember I told you I made these large formed metal works, so of minimal geometric things, and then carted them around and put them in front of buildings. And so I had a collection of these. And so Reston, Virginia, asked if I would exhibit them around downtown Reston. At the time Reston was a very sort of, you know, contemporary place. It was kind of great. Well, I put them out there, and somebody—first of all, about 15 people—it weighed about 1500 pounds. And at least 15 people got around, picked one up, and threw it in the lake. [00:28:00] It was a huge piece—huge piece. So without telling me anything, the City of Reston used a bulldozer bucket to pick it out of the lake, threw it—literally threw it—in the back of a dump truck, and dumped in the dump. Really. You know, so it was like, well, okay. So I went out to the dump. I looked at it down there at the bottom of this big pile, twisted, totally wrecked. Had to sue Reston. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Yes. 
 JIM SANBORN:  And I was reimbursed for the piece, and nothing near what it was worth. But it was a lesson that was profound in that just about anything you make is possible for somebody out in the public to want to screw it up. So, you know, hence that long delay in trying to figure out from an engineering standpoint how to build work that isn't mutable. Or as immutable as possible. And in doing so, if you can make work that's immutable and is going to stand there forever, and using materials that aren't going to weather, then you're then qualified to make large public art for large amounts of money. Before that, the only people getting screwed are the artist and the commission. So that's when I started doing substantial work. So that was a big lesson. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. But you—and the piece in Baltimore, do you feel that it was sort of a big outdoor piece? Or was it a place? 
 JIM SANBORN:  It was a temple site. It was oriented at a causeway that went down to the water, right into the water. And you could walk up—like you'd walk—came to it in a boat, you'd get out of your boat, walk up the causeway into the center of this piece. And it was oriented very much like an Egyptian temple was on the Nile. [00:30:00] And it was made of a series of I guess t10 truncated pyramids 30 feet wide and eight feet high and six feet deep. And then there was a steel superstructure that sat on top of that. And then inside that there was a reflective section that concentrated sunlight down into this area that was suspended over a body of water. And just under the water there was a grating. So that you could walk up into this temple and basically be bathed in this intense light and walk on water. Because you could walk right out on the water. And it looked like water, but you could walk on it like a god. So that was what that was about. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  It sounds fantastic. Is it still there? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  And so it's sort of a recreation area there. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Well, sort of. But it's not really. I mean it was across the street from a hospital. But on the other side of the street was a very bad neighborhood. And I don't know what condition it's in. I mean I know that they did some restoration work to it. But whether the pool is still in operation, whether the metal is polished well enough to concentrate the light, I don't know. It's a long time ago. But, you know, some of these things you just sort of have to let go, and just they live in photos, and that's it. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  And did you feel it was an effective piece? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. I was pretty happy about that piece. It took, you know, three—two or three years to build, going back and forth to Baltimore every day. It was a hell of a thing. But I was paid. Then the one in Charleston was right on its heels. So then I ended up commuting to West Virginia and staying down there to build this huge thing using granite, these huge granite slabs and then probably about 50,000 pounds of government metal: aluminum that I got from the Navy. [00:32:00] 
 AVIS BERMAN:  The yard? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. So I used that—I guess about 20,000, 30,000 pounds of aluminum from the government. And then ALCOA supplied the rest because they had a West Virginia plant. And so with that material I worked in a steel fabricating yard down there and built the piece on site. And it was again a temple structure. It was about 60-by-60 feet by 25 feet high. And it had a grid in the roof part of it. I had a pseudo roof. It wasn't covered, but it had the roof beams, and it felt like you were inside the Temple of Luxor, which had columns and roof beams without a roof structure. So it was very much Egyptian-inspired, Luxor kind of temple. Had big louvered sections made out of thick metal. And there were some major disasters in the way it was originally built. And I learned a lot about contractors and cities and municipalities for that project because I left specific blueprints the way the piece is supposed to be built, and the contractor, after building this huge civic center arena, the important thing, the artwork out there was much less important. So we'll just do it. 
 So they had these hundred-ton, multi-sectioned, granite walls that they built. And they were like six feet off. So that the huge aluminum superstructure didn't fit. So they had to come in and remove them and move the 200 tons around and do it again. It was still a foot off. But I had to compensate. So from then on it was like—I was in Egypt when they did one of them. And they hired an Italian company to come over and put it together. [00:34:00] And they just screwed it up. But anyway, that shows I could never be somewhere else when one of these is being assembled. That was really stupid. It worked out in the long run, but it was still a very lumpy installation. But I learned a lot. And I'm glad I learned it in '78 instead of later. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm, mm-hmm [affirmative]. Well, did it ever resolve? Were you happy with the outcome? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. I was relatively happy. I mean, they had some problems with the foundation. The piece was actually designed so that it was very flush with the paving so it was almost as if—if you thought of the paving as being sand around it, you know, it'd come up around the stones, it'd come up around the aluminum. Well, they put the stones on a plinth this high. But that wrecked the concept, you know, for me. And they went and poured the concrete another layer to raise it in order to make it look like I wanted it. So to me it was always a bit flawed because of the way they raised it like that. I just [inaudible]. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. And was there any public interaction with this in terms of, you know, the people who were going to use the building? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Oh, sure. I mean, many newspaper reports and interviews and all of this stuff. I mean, there was a woman named Carter Giltinan, and she was more or less the arts lady in West Virginia. And she was actually—once again—an old friend of the family. So that really assisted me in getting that commission. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. Right. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Anyway, so that's more or less how I got that. And I more or less lived down there in her home the whole time of the year it took me to build it down there. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  And does it have—I mean did you feel—so did you relate it to the site or the building or what? 
 JIM SANBORN:  It was related to the site and also to the Elk River. [00:36:00] Again, it was another piece oriented like a temple was oriented to a river; this time the Elk River in Charleston. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  I guess what I'm also getting at is when do you feel you began to get, shall we say, more site-specific in your work? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Well, I mean that—the site-specific nature of it for me, I mean started on the first stone pieces I did for the Baltimore Metro. And what were the dates on that? It was like 1980. I don't know. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Let me see. 
 JIM SANBORN:  That's too early for these slides. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  '81 through '83. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. So '81 to '83, I always—gallery work was, I was making compass installations. I was doing these geological things. And so for the Baltimore Metro basically I was building these—what appeared to be natural stone outcroppings that came out of the ground. And they were there before the Metro station was put there. And so for me that related ultimately to the site because it was supposed to have been there way before anything else. So to me it was definitely not plop art. The earth was plopped on it. [They laugh.] Okay? For me conceptually that's the way that worked. And I could put one outcropping over here. And then as in geology, another one would line up with it in a sedimentary way over there. So I did a whole series of those kinds of geological pieces that had multiple sections but were oriented in a natural way, a way nature would have oriented them. So the plop art, from what I considered, the plop art pieces, the metal pieces that were moved around at Reston, those ended up with the stone things, and I started incorporating, you know, the environment into it. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm, mm-hmm [affirmative]. Now how did you get that commission? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Which one? [00:38:00] 
 AVIS BERMAN:  The Metro—the Baltimore one. 
 JIM SANBORN:  The Baltimore Metro was a mayor's office project. I was short-listed for it. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  I mean, were you competing? Or was it— 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes, I was competing. Yes. That was a public art project for the city. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  I mean, did you start putting your name on various lists? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. By that time I had a couple of resume things. And I'd had the Elk River Project —I mean the Patapsco River thing—they still remember that. And I had sort of an in with the mayor's office. I mean this is Mayor Schaefer, and he had a pretty inspired arts program. I got to know those people. I actually got them involved in the surplus metal gig I had at Glen Echo. So that Baltimore artists and Maryland Institute artists could start using it also. So there was this strange connection. And then also the City of Baltimore sent me actually as an artist-in-residence to a Sister City Program a few years later in Kawasaki, Japan. I did a piece there. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. Well, maybe that's what we should talk about, is how, you know, getting to Japan. Baltimore is the sister city of— 
 JIM SANBORN:  Kawasaki. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Was that your first time in Japan? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  And you were there for what was it, two years? 
 JIM SANBORN:  No, no. I was just there three months. It was a summer project. It was a full three months living in Kawasaki. And I did a split stone piece with a crack in the middle of it, which I don't know if there are any photographs of—very few if they exist at all. And it was more or less about Flight 007 that had been shot down by the Koreans just a week before I arrived. [00:40:00] I was on the same flight on the same route. So it was inspired by current events. And it was very simple. All the others—there were nine sculptors. It was actually a symposium. There were nine sculptors from around the world—from Germany and Japan, China and various other places. But they were all doing pretty much Noguchi-esque carved objects or Chinese figurative work: some guy holding a dove. It was all pretty schmaltzy. My piece was very different from anybody else's in that respect. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  It's kind of funny. It's almost like where you were at Pratt when you first came in. They were there. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. Yes, I mean—I mean that's the way it is. The figurative element in public art is still there, no question. Embodied with Ray Kaskey. I mean Ray does very well with it. I mean Ray's a wonderful friend. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Well, Ray also doesn't just take the old symbols. He invents things, too. So that makes a big difference. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes, yes. Totally. And I mean you know he's trained as an architect. So he, you know— 
 AVIS BERMAN:  And also, yes, he has also—understands those abstract compositional principles well. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. I mean his first pieces are right from the architecture department at the University of Maryland. When I was teaching at Maryland, I always wondered, whose piece is that out there, you know. When I found out it was Ray's, I couldn't believe it because it was so abstract and simple, you know, knowing what he did after that, it was like stunning. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. And that was—but, you know, I guess it was sort of the end of something for him rather than the beginning of something. But he has—I think he's able to fuse more imaginative elements into figurative sculpture than say someone like Hart [ph] was able to. 
 JIM SANBORN:  His lions and lambs piece is great; that's my favorite piece. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. 
 JIM SANBORN:  The law enforcement piece. [00:42:00] 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Anyway, let's—what impressed you the most about Japan? What stuck with you? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Well, the existence of the ancient culture. I contrasted it later in life to Taiwan where I was also doing a project. It's like night and day. The Japanese revered their past and preserved it. And, you know, you can walk into a 1200-year-old wooden building. It didn't catch fire. It's quite a remarkable experience, you know. And the whole Japanese art, the figurative aspects, the Buddhist aspects. I was particularly taken by the animist parts of it, animism embodied in the Shinto, the Shinto religion or nature worship. And how they revered trees and considered trees to be almost religious—just with religious reverence. Obviously because they were living on an island and had to take care of what they have. But I thought it was really remarkable. And the whole culture, as deferential as it is, and generally as kind as it is, albeit it is rigid certainly in a lot of ways; but I really enjoyed the culture and the food and the whole thing. It was just a wonderful experience. 
 I went back twice after that just to travel on my own. And I just felt as if the aesthetic was just terrific. And I was mostly taken with the architecture. The architecture, the simple and the oldest architecture in Nara. Which in those early Nara temples were inspired largely by Greek architecture. And you can see those influences in there. And then the Nightingale Temple where you can walk along. [00:44:00] Your footsteps are heard—they sound like birds. It was to deter night visitors from coming; so the floor squeaked in a very particular way. And that was amazing to me. And the archery, which I still practice today. And, you know, it was a great cultural experience. And what else? 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Well— 
 JIM SANBORN:  They gave me these great books. I just read one of the books the other day, and it repeats the whole experience. They're kind of neat things. These are [inaudible]. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  This—oh! We're looking at this beautiful leather-and-gilt bound album, I guess, that says: "International Sculpture Symposium, 1983, Kawasaki, Japan." Yes. With these beautiful papers. 
 JIM SANBORN:  My original little proposal. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. And your itinerary. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. It was just the whole thing. It was really fascinating. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. So am I looking in—are all the sculptors from different places men? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Different places, yes. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Were they all men? 
 JIM SANBORN:  This is the kind of thing. This is the Chinese guy, this kind of thing. You know it's all this kind of stuff. Mine was this simple thing. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. Right. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Black and white granite. So anyway. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Well of course anyone from China would, you know, they're so repressed anyway that it would have been very hard to— 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Well, this is terrific. [00:46:00] 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes, it was great. And later I did a thing in Taiwan which they gave me a very similar book. It was great, seeing yourself in younger years. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Well, there certainly were a lot of banquets. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. They were really into that. You had to sing and all that stuff. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  So early karaoke. 
 JIM SANBORN:  And there was another artist, Mark Lear. I don't know if you ever heard of him. He's a California-based artist who does public art stuff. We were the only Americans on the gig. But it was largely initiated, again, by Howard Fox at the LA County Museum for their anniversary [ph]. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  [Inaudible.] Well, maybe LA County by then. That's great. 
 JIM SANBORN:  So it was fun. It was kind of kick to have that. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Yes. Because also it's so done and it's so organized. You probably would never have organized that. 
 JIM SANBORN:  [Inaudible.] 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Yesterday you were beginning to mention, but we didn't quite get there, you mentioned your first show with Diane Brown on sedimentary constructions. And I didn't know if you wanted to talk about her being in the gallery. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. I mean I—yes, so I had switched to stone and was doing the geological abstractions. So I did a series of these. And Diane Brown had a smaller gallery in DC. And then she opened up this brand-new gallery in an industrial area. And she was really in the vanguard of those things in Washington. Everybody else was on P Street in small little galleries, and Diane branched out to a second space on O Street. So I was the inaugural show for that. And brought in, I don't know, tens of thousands of pounds of rocks in small little pieces, and did these constructions—[00:48:00]—again these geological, cut-away constructions which were very successful. She sold seven of these things. They were huge. But now over the years people have a hard time moving them. [They laugh.] So they've slowly been donated off to every museum in Washington, which they take reluctantly because it's such a pain. They're large pieces made up of small pieces. Anyway, so I get calls from various places around town, the Corcoran, National Museum of American Art, how do you put this thing together? You know. So—but it's that kind of situation. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  But she remained your dealer for a while, right? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Many years. And we are pretty close. I mean she was good. She's a very smart lady. And, yes. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. Well, did she—and I know she eventually opened a gallery in New York, but that didn't last for too long. But I know you had a show. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Well, she had a gallery for a long time on Green Street. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Then the dreaded mid-'80s when the art market collapsed in the '80s, she opened a new gallery on Broome Street. Simultaneously with opening that gallery, she was struck by a taxi and flew through the air about a hundred feet and fractured innumerable bones in her body. And was severely embezzled by her accountant, who embezzled her money and bought cocaine, and it went up his nose. And those three events conspired to make it impossible for her to continue. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Oh, my God! I never knew why she disappeared because she really was smart and she had good galleries, you know. [00:50:00] 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. It was really unbelievable collection of events. I showed with her when she was on Green Street, again, more stone constructions. And I sold a couple of up there. One of my—I mean, at the time I was doing these large stone constructions that were sort of cantilevered out from the wall, and the stone shells made shadow images underneath them on the wall. And very clear shadow images because I used pinpoint light bulbs that cast very sharp shadows. And I could arrange cracks in the stone in such a way that they made almost perfect lightning bolts on the wall. And I did several of these installations at Diane's. And the critic from ArtNews wrote a review saying: "I know Sanborn's work, but why did he choose to paint all this stuff on the wall?" Never realizing that everything in the show was made out of shadow, which was extremely difficult to pull off. What else? 
 AVIS BERMAN:  I've actually got a photocopy of a postcard of that installation— 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  —somewhere here because I saw—yes, it was a postcard. Yes, that was interesting. I was going to ask you. 
 JIM SANBORN:  That piece was again shown by Ned Rifkin at the Corcoran a year after that. And that one was Artists' Space . I think one of the compasses? 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Well, this is the one—this was the—yes.  Anyway, this is what your—this is the postcard. 
 JIM SANBORN:  This is—yes. [00:52:00] This is the one from Artists' Space . This is Artists' Space. Yes, that was 1981. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Oh, okay. Because this says—maybe I've got them—this is '85. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Oh, let's see. Invisible Forces , Artists' Space . This says '82. Well, I've got '81 down there. C'est la vie. Probably in the middle of the year. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. Right. And then that's the '85 Diane Brown show. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Diane Brown, right. Yes, that just completely deflated my, you know—that was the last show I had in New York really. I mean honestly it was just so ridiculous that the critic can so totally miss what's going on. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. Yes. I mean you're telling me all these things. And maybe they happen to other artists, too. But you seem to have had all kinds of weird obstacles. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Just in terms of the fates or personal malice or other things like that. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Whatever. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Well, shows you— 
 JIM SANBORN:  Too good at what I did. Too convincing that they were painted on the wall. [They laugh.] 
 AVIS BERMAN:  I know, I know. Did your dealer write a letter to ArtNews or anything? 
 JIM SANBORN:  No, I didn't. I mean I just didn't want to mess with it, you know. Gerrit Henry was a pretty big critic around that time. He just totally missed the mark. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Yes. Well, he was ubiquitous then. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. Totally. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  I wonder how close he could've gotten to the wall. 
 JIM SANBORN:  I know. It was just baffling to me. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Yes. Anyway. Now I think—because the title interests me, I'm doing to go to a 1985 piece called Covert Obsolescence. 
 JIM SANBORN:  It's not '85. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Alright. 
 JIM SANBORN:  That's '95. [00:54:00] 
 AVIS BERMAN:  '95, okay. Well, I've got— 
 JIM SANBORN:  Anything *Covert *is after Kryptos . 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Okay. Well, that was what I was going to say, is that when that was—okay, that's in— 
 JIM SANBORN:  I mean the next piece is after—and this is all pretty much newer stuff here. Anyway, so, yes, so through the '80s I did these pieces. And I did several—I did an office park in Fairfax. It was stratified stone column kind of situation. I did one in Bethesda here. Again, stone construction. I did several stone constructions through the '80s. I was able to support myself from doing those. And then in—in the beginning I was doing these straight stone tableaux about geology. Then I discovered lodestones and stones which had—for me a lodestone has a tremendous amount of internal content because it's magical, it's magnetized. And lodestones are magnetized by lightning. And that's the way they're magnetized. So I became fascinated with lodestones and went around the country. 
 And I worked with a physicist at the NASA-Goddard Space Flight Center who is a specialist in terrestrial magnetism—or extraterrestrial magnetism actually. So he was a specialist in meteorites, particularly magnetized ones. But he had also done a lot of research on lodestones. So he directed me toward this town in southern Utah called Cedar City. And I went to Cedar City in the early '80s and [00:56:00], with a tractor trailer and a bulldozer, to an iron mining area. And this area had just been bought by an iron mining concern, an international—or global—mining concern. And they were going to basically tear down a mountain that was in the middle of the mining area. At the top of the mountain there were located many, many large lodestones that had been struck by lightning repeatedly over millennia, and of whom the townspeople were very fond because they'd come out during thunderstorms to watch the lightning strikes, which was fascinating. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  So it was a natural lightning field. 
 JIM SANBORN:  There was no question it was a natural lightning field in Cedar City, Utah, Iron Mountain. So I basically knowing it was all going to get trashed anyway, connected very long steel cables to the lodestones on the top of the mountain and pulled them down with the bulldozers and loaded them onto trucks. Brought them back east, along with another load of fossilized seabed that I found in Utah in another area that had fossilized seabed that had ripples in it which you could see. And also—there was something else I brought back. Oh, petrified trees. So I had a big tractor trailer loaded with stuff that came to my studio. All the material that I was going to ultimately use for public art projects because I was doing fairly well. And hoped over the next 15, 20 years I could use these things. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  And was there any problem—did anyone stop you from taking any of this stuff? Or did you have to get permits to take it? 
 JIM SANBORN:  No, this is all—I mean the iron mining company, it's just iron ore to them. They were going to grind it all up. So they didn't mind selling me big chunks of it for the same as they would've had to grind it up for. It was easy, and it was inexpensive. The petrified trees come from private ranchers' land [00:58:00], and there was a big business in Holbrook, Arizona, selling petrified trees, a global thing. Then the ripple rock came from a place called Torrey, Utah, and it's famous for this stuff. And people used it for decorating their gardens and whatever. So I just liked all these materials because they had content. They were just rocks. But they had magical content in a variety of ways. Petrified wood, ripple rock. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  And they had history. 
 JIM SANBORN:  I mean a lot of history in all that stuff. And so I started—and again, it's my archaeology, geology, all of that stuff—paleontology—it all came together there. And so on getting that material, then I did several, you know, public artworks that used that, that used those things. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. And how did you hook up with the scientist at Goddard? 
 JIM SANBORN:  How did I originally do that? I think I might have read a paper. I did a lot of research, again, at the Library of Congress about lodestone. I think he'd written a recent paper, if I remember correctly. An interesting guy, Peter Wasilewski was his name. Wasilewski is—yes, he's there and does a lot of work collecting meteorites around the North Pole and the South Pole. So anyway, he was great. So I brought back a lot of stuff. And I helped him prove his theories about lodestones. So in my collecting stuff, in my studies about lodestones, I was able to reinforce his research. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Is that because you brought him samples? Or because of the way— 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. I got a lot of materials. I tested their strengths. I took pieces to him and tested their strengths. Things like that. [01:00:00] 
 AVIS BERMAN:  So clearly—and also this goes back to that piece you made, you know, in West Virginia, at some point you had either gotten better at math or at physics or at science that—I mean, I don't know how you— 
 JIM SANBORN:  There was still no math involved except the math that I had to calculate how many tons, you know, materials were. Which was fairly easy with a calculator in this kind of business. So long as I could steer clear of algorithms and calculus I was fine. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Yes. Well, in real life there's no need for calculus. 
 JIM SANBORN:  That's what I say. So, yes. And also the trip to West Virginia was seminal because the road—they had cut a road just before my project. And they had moved more earth to cut this road through the mountains of West Virginia than mankind had moved in its entire history. And they had laid bare geological strata of the mountain ranges. And that was '77. And that started my geological period. That drive back and forth commuting weekly to West Virginia and seeing this amazing geological phenomenon. And then I found that red, crazy stone in some tacky house in West Virginia. So it all came together. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. 
 JIM SANBORN:  So that's how I found that stone and started working with geology. Then the lodestones came up. And then all through like the '80s basically was lodestone and compass-needle installations. I did the installation at Artists' Space. I did an installation at the Virginia Museum. I did an installation at California College of Arts and Crafts. Houston. I was very popular with the installations. I got the Artists' Space installation. [01:02:00] I got two or three fellowships during that period and was doing very well with the whole suspended compass needles things. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  So that was sort of—do you feel that you've matured during—I mean when did you say you really kind of found yourself as an artist? 
 JIM SANBORN:  In the early '80s—actually early '70s, I mean late '70s—is when I started doing work which was I felt more uniquely mine, although I felt as if the Egyptian-inspired temple structures were also mine. But there are other people who could technically be said to be doing that in the '70s; you know, Nancy Holt and some other people were doing earth-inspired work that—or temple-like structures out in the desert, things like this. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  I was going to ask you, when you were doing these geological structures and getting these stones and everything, did you see yourself in relation, or now if not then, to any of the earthworks artists? 
 JIM SANBORN:  I came after them. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  I know. But I wondered if you saw any kind of connection? 
 JIM SANBORN:  We worked, I guess, with similar ideas. But I never thought—I never thought it was that direct because it was a very different approach. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  For example, is [Robert] Smithson an artist who interests you? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Not so much at the time. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Again, I didn't want to do work, you know, Robert Long and the Long Stones and the [inaudible] and all that stuff. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Oh, Richard Long. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Richard Long, yes. Yes, I just—whatever. These days I—these days, I felt like the work that I was doing, making large pieces that are very small pieces and stacking them and doing all this stuff, I felt closer to [Andy] Goldsworthy. [01:04:00] You know, it relates far more to what he does now than what I was doing then, you know. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. Yes. Right. No, and you certainly weren't taking the big heavy equipment and moving the earth. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Right. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  It almost seems opposite to what you were doing. I mean, I don't see you as someone— 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes, I never—I didn't buy into that. I did not like that fact that they were screwing up the environment to make art out of it. And I—granted, some of the pieces are very beautiful. But I didn't buy into that. And I did something very opposite to that for several years in the '90s just to counteract that movement and to demonstrate that you can do huge outdoor works without leaving a trace. That kind of in some ways pissed me off, that people would go around throwing pigment all over the desert that didn't necessarily go away for a very long time. You know, bulldozing things up. I mean I had some difficulty with that. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Or aestheticizing the desert or whatever it's supposed to be. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. Right. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  And were you ever—because this is the opposite—interested, although it's not like your work, anything that Christo did who always had something temporary? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. I mean, I certainly liked the early Kit Canyon. That was his closest—the body of work I really liked. When he came into the urban environment, I was not thrilled. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. I think Valley Curtain . 
 JIM SANBORN:  Valley Curtain . I think that was another Kit Canyon one, too; I think there were two. Those things were, I thought, fascinating, and I liked the way he worked with the remote environment. But the remote environment is what interested me the most. And I was traveling every year—sometimes twice a year—to Utah, Colorado, Great Basin, Nevada, [01:06:00] areas just to travel and also to store up my memory banks for locations of interesting things, where I could find interesting rocks, stones, things I could use. My inspiration came 99 percent from the desert Southwest, starting late '70s. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Well, I think what I want to do is let's begin to talk about Kryptos and your experience with GSA. And I guess how you got the commission. Start with that sort of thing. And let's not talk about the aftermath right now. I want to concentrate on what was—you know, doing the piece. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Right. Well, I had applied—I mean I had applied for GSAs for many years, and I had worked with [inaudible]. And I had worked with Don and I'd get short-listed, but I'd never gotten one. And so I was continually updating my files of the GSA and hoped something would come along. Then when the CIA project came along, the panel was stacked in my favor. What can I say? [Laughs.] Ned Rifkin was on the panel, Alan Stone was on the panel, Isamu Noguchi [*sic *Yuriko Yamaguchi –ed.] was on the panel. These were all people that I knew and was very familiar with. And they all knew my work. And I think Richard Andrews was on the panel. They all knew my work, and they all knew I'd worked with Invisible Forces . And Invisible Forces was an important thing to me at the time. So they all knew about that. So that's how they made that leap, I believe, and I got that. Plus I was a local boy, and that helped a lot I think, too. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  What you say short-listed, you didn't have to—I mean how did you know you were short-listed? [01:08:00] I mean, did they tell you? Because I mean— 
 JIM SANBORN:  GSA changed their modus operandi several times. And I don't remember exactly whether I found out that I'd gotten it and was old that there was a group of artists that I was chosen to do it. Or whether I was told that I was on a short list. But I didn't ever have to submit anything for it. I got it based on my previous work. So I guess I wasn't short-listed. I got the project for— 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. Because it seems—and then did you have to— 
 JIM SANBORN:  And they called me and asked me if I wanted to take the project. So it was basically given to me as the rest of the GSAs were. But I sometimes, I think I did know that I was up for a project. I think GSA does select a pool of artists. And I was told prior that I was in the pool, and would I be interested if I got it? And that's the way they did it. Because they didn't want to include artists in the pool that wouldn't take it. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. To go through all of that. 
 JIM SANBORN:  To go through the whole thing. And they got burned with my project—I mean not me, but the other half of the CIA commissions. So anyway—so, yes. So basically I was told that I got the project. Then I built a maquette, a fairly realistic maquette. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Was this— 
 JIM SANBORN:  And did about six months of research about the agency, thinking about what I wanted to do. I knew full well that the agency was not the code-breaking arm of the federal intelligence community. The NSA was. But it didn't matter to me because I knew that 90 percent of Americans didn't know that. And so they all associated the CIA with spy craft, which they do. But I mean, the CIA runs spies. The NSA runs information gathering on a large scale, mostly electronic. [01:10:00] But the CIA has the human intelligence. Now my father was a government employee for 30 years and worked in the Library of Congress, which is inherently a fairly beautiful building, although it's largely painted institutional green inside. And all of our friends were government employees. And we had known agency employees—or at least my parents knew that they worked for the agency. And I was a Washington person, and so I was familiar with the politics and all of this stuff. So it did seem to me to be a no-brainer to take the CIA commission. I mean I was really—I was also a fan of John Le Carré, and his spy novels were, to me, the most sophisticated and interesting and non-superficial. So that's where I came from in that regard. 
 I was always a lefty. My parents were dyed-in-the-wool Democrats and lefties. And my father was always blasting somebody at the Washington Post for less than liberal causes. But I took the project for the agency because I felt as if that institution after taking a tour is gigantic. There are thousands upon thousands of people who work there. It's a large university scale. And so, sure, there are programs that the agency sponsored which were anathema to me. But on the larger point, you know, I went in there, and I met people there. [01:02:00] I mean, there are people that clean the floors, there are people that, you know, keep things in great condition. There are artists on staff. There are people that do the graphic design for them. The cafeteria. There's just a myriad of individuals who were there, who are very proud of what they do when they work for the government. And I really could not see denying them art because I had some political axe to grind against the agency. I thought it would be very unfair to do that. 
 The only reason I'm saying this is because during the process of the panel meetings—during the process of the panel meetings, Betsy Hess of the Village Voice wrote an article called "Art of the State," in which she more or less said that any artist who accepted a commission from the CIA was selling out and was buying into the Great Satan. And this came out before I had been selected as the artist and before Matt Mullican had been selected as the other artist to do the work on the inside of CIA. Have you interviewed him yet? 
 AVIS BERMAN:  No. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Okay. And, you know, so they went around with their microphone saying, "Hi, I'm from the Village Voice . Would you take a commission from the CIA?" So they went around and interviewed 25 hip New York artists, and of course, "Whoa! No way I'm going to do that! Are you kidding?" So then Mullican and I both were selected for the project. And Matt Mullican withdrew right after the article came out. And, you know, in a way I said, you know, I said, well, I mean—I said to myself—I didn't have a single qualm about doing what I did for the agency. [01:04:00] Because in one way I was playing with them. Because I knew I was playing with them. I did my presentation, and I knew what I was doing. And I felt as if I might be able to make some sort of difference, and I didn't want to let down the people at the agency I thought really needed it. And so that's my main reasons for doing it. And so— 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Well, you'd already been asked by the GSA if you were going to take it. So you did make a commitment. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Well, so did Matt Mullican, and he didn't take it after he had committed to it. And as a result of being burned, CIA withdrew the money for the interior and never commissioned it. And they commissioned ultimately 20 years later a model of the Blackbird spy plane. So I mean, that's what you get, you know. I mean, if you're going to have it, do that kind of thing, I think it's tragic. But that's the way it is. Whatever. So anyway, I felt as if there was something that I could do there that would stimulate the environment out there. And for whatever reasons, perhaps assist. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  I guess that I won't be—I wouldn't be interviewing Matt Mullican because he didn't do the commission. I only do interviews with— 
 JIM SANBORN:  He might have done other ones. But, no, he might have been blacklisted after that. I really don't know. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. Because he's not, you know, on the list of having a lot of commissions. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Right. So anyway, you know, so I took it, and I did a tremendous amount of research, and I did all the studying and Library of Congress work and as much as I could learn about code. And all that stuff. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Well, now let me—right. What came first? Research, presentation? And how did it—how did you— 
 JIM SANBORN:  Research. When I found out I had the commission, I had almost a year to prepare for making a model. So they paid me a design fee, I think, in the very beginning. And then I made this fairly elaborate model. [01:16:00] And I'm pretty sure it was accepted first time, right off, without having any go back and fix this, and fix that stuff. I don't think it was. And from the very beginning it included this component of an encoded text. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. Was this the first time you worked with lettering or inscriptions? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes, very first time. Now I have to say, you know, I told you earlier that one of the world's greatest typographers stayed with us at our house, Herman Zapf. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Yes. 
 JIM SANBORN:  And he made my parents an alphabet with a Bic pen in their guest book that was frameable. And still is. I still have it. It's quite a remarkable thing. So typography was my dad's thing. And he had worked with a typography company here in Washington called General Type, T-Y-P-E. And he had a guy there named Buddy Harris who ran the shop. And he more or less told me, "Listen, if you want to deal with anything with code, go see Buddy Harris, and he'll, you know—" So I worked out a system with Buddy—he gave me and taught me the typeface. And then we had to stencilize it so that I could cut something through without having the letters, the centers of the zeroes fall out. So I worked at General Type. And I also, at the time, I had to figure out how to cut out the letters. So I knew if all else failed, I could them out by hand. I tried it with a jigsaw and took actually a piece of the metal to the presentation, and it had letters cut out of it through thick copper with jigsaws, by hand, a laborious process. So it was accepted based on that. 
 
 But at the same time there was a process called "waterjet," and it had just started. There were only two companies in the United States that did it. The CIA commissions were $250,000, and the estimate that I got just to cut out the letters was $250,000. [01:18:00] So I was then stuck with cutting letters by hand, which after the commission was accepted, I started gearing up and hired several assistants. Had some copper made by Revere Copper, Paul Revere's company in Boston made the sheet copper. And it was very expensive material, and I had it shipped to my studio. And I hired about five or six assistants who began cutting the copper. We lined it up with metal, cut the copper. It took two and a half years, five days a week, 52 weeks a year to cut out the letters. Nine hundred jigsaw blades, nine jigsaws, and about 20 assistants because they could not take it; they could only—each assistant lasted, most of the assistants lasted only a week or two. They started dreaming about cutting letters. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Now was it because it was so boring? Or because it was so laborious? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Physically demanding and stressful because they could not cut outside the lines. They had to—they could not make any mistakes. So most people were extremely slow. You know, they got three letters a week—three letters a day—out of one person. So it took somebody with great confidence and great skill and obsessive/compulsive traits to do it. And finally one guy came along, got in the group, and virtually cut out half of the entire thing himself in a very short time. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  And who was that? 
 JIM SANBORN:  A fellow named Dave Sheldon [a sculptor –JS], whom I've never seen since. I always wondered what happened to him. But Dave was really amazing. And then there was another fellow, I can't remember his name, but I have pictures of him cutting letters. But that's all going into the book. So basically, it got cut out. And then I wrote the plain text. [01:20:00] I went to Arizona, [inaudible] and bought a petrified tree. On the way back, I devised the plain text, what I was going to write for the plain text. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Now I'm confused because when you're having—the letters have the code with the text in them, right? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  So why are you doing the— 
 JIM SANBORN:  I could cut—I could out this chart. This side is the chart with alphabets; it's just shifted. It's called Vigenére's tableau. So they could begin cutting on this half, which took all of nine months to cut, while I was coming up with the coded part on the other side. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Okay. 
 JIM SANBORN:  So they could be working while I'm working on this for efficiency's sake. So I could get it done in a reasonable amount of time. So they cut that, and I wrote the plain text for the code. Originally I wanted to use somebody like John Le Carré. Sent a letter to his publisher, never got a response. So in the end it ended up much better when I did it myself because then fewer people would know what it said. And I also enjoyed writing it. So that's basically you know— 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Now— 
 JIM SANBORN:  So then the CIA, I was thinking of who—how was I going to encode this—I wanted this piece to last into or through the 21st century. I couldn't really do a code or invent a code based on ancient codes because they'd all been cracked. So I had to turn to somebody who was high tech, in the high-tech field, and knew what they were doing. So I said am I going to go to Russians, am I going to go to Mossad, am I going to go to somebody else? Then I said, well, there is a stipulation in my contract that I have to buy American. Yes, I could have gone to these people, considering the kind of project it was. And it took me quite a while. Finally I resigned myself, okay, fine. So I asked the agency if they knew of somebody. [01:22:00] And there was a fellow who had recently retired from the cryptography section to open his own technical security company. And his name was Ed Scheidt. 
 So Ed and I met at secret locations because Ed could never trust his telephone. I knew that my phone was probably being tapped by somebody because I knew I was being watched because people were getting on ladders trying to look in my studio. And other strange stuff was happening. So that we knew that we were under a gun. We suspected it was NSA employees trying to one-up the CIA. Or CIA people trying to find out what the code was so that they could crack it almost before it hit the ground. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  So at this moment even—I mean once you said you were making up a code for a work of art, people were already— 
 JIM SANBORN:  Trying to crack it, yes. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  At the time, were you upset? Or did you think, oh, it's flattering. They're just so into this already? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Oh, yes. It was flattering. It was great. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  At that time. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Oh, yes. Totally. Yes. And I knew. I spent every cent of the commission. I made nothing on this commission. It almost bankrupted me because of how much I proposed. I mean it was a massive amount of work and a massive amount of materials for the project. And I made very, very—almost no profit, if any at all. But I knew it was a high-profile project, that the agency was the agency, and that I'd get press. And what I proposed, I knew that if I proposed it right, that that would pay off ultimately in getting more commissions or whatever it was. That was my hope. And so that went on way beyond my wildest dreams as far as that was concerned. Not financially but at least from a notoriety standpoint. So I basically worked on that plain text and then figured that out. [01:24:00] And Ed basically gave me—he gave me a primer of ancient encoding systems. And he also gave me some ideas for contemporary coding systems, more sophisticated systems, systems that didn't necessarily depend on mathematics. That was one of my prerequisites. 
 So he told me about matrix codes and things like that. These are the parts of Kryptos that have already been cracked. So I can discuss them. But he told me about coding systems that I could then modify in a myriad of ways. So that even he would not know what it says. Okay? So that was very seductive to me. And so I took those things. We met two or three times. And that's what I based the whole thing on. And then the CIA asked that I—well, it was actually part of the contract that stated—that they had to know what it said in order to know that I didn't put something pornographic on there or anti-agency that would end up in biting them in the butt, you know, years later. There was really no point to doing that. I mean there's no point for my doing that because they would just rip it out of the ground, and that would be the end of it, so— 
 But nonetheless, they asked if I would give it to the Department of Historical Intelligence, which consisted of three individuals in a small room. And so I said, "How am I going to do this so that they can read and understand that I haven't written something that's subversive to the point it's going to be removed? Yet, they'll be able to understand—so they'll understand enough, but they won't remember it." Okay? So basically what I did is I—since there were three people in the room, I took the text, this is the English text, and cut it into strips in sentences. [01:26:00] And then took the sentences and rearranged them all in a different order. And glued them onto pieces of paper. I made two sets. One set if there were three people in the room, one set if there were two people in the room, and one genius. This place is only five minutes from here. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Okay. 
 JIM SANBORN:  So I devised this system. So what if, out of these three people, heaven forbid, two of them had photographic memories, and they'd remember it their entire lives. So just by lucky guess I said, Okay, let's just say one of them has a photographic memory. So I made up two sets: one where I divided into threes, and one where I divided it into two sets. So I went into the room and I said, "I need to give you this information about Kryptos , and I really want you to remember it. Does one of you by any chance have a photographic memory?" And two of them instantly pointed to the third person. And I said, "Sorry. That was a trick. But please leave the room." So I got her out of there. And so I was left with the director and his assistant—or the other person in the room, whatever, the other analyst. 
 So I put the two pieces of paper down and waited. And so they were reading it. They reread it a couple of times. And then the woman started shaking. I saw her hand shaking first, and then she just started shaking violently. It was almost as if she had a seizure. But she was just completely and utterly terrorized by the responsibility of what she had to do. What if I tricked them and put this in the courtyard, and there was something in there that embarrassed them? She's toast. So she had to be led out of the room, she was crying. [01:28:00] She was a mess. And so I got a letter from the Department of Historical Intelligence saying, "The Department of Historical Intelligence cannot accept responsibility for this artwork. Figure out another way." 
 So at the time I was building the piece out in front of the agency and the interior part simultaneously, the stone parts of it. And the front of the agency is the main entrance for all the employees coming from the parking lot into the new building that they were building that this artwork was for. And people were giving me really lousy comments. I mean really lousy, continuous, daily 10, 15, 20 just yelling at me, just cursing at me saying, "We don't need this shit!" "This is crap!" "We don't want this?" "Why are we spending $250,000?" "This is a joke." And they started pointing, laughing. It just wore me down. And it was a difficult project as it was; but it was just made more difficult by the negativity I was being barraged with. 
 So I ended up writing a letter, an open letter to CIA employees explaining exactly what I was doing to everyone. And at that time also some people like Patrick Buchanan referred to my project—he was a contender for the White House at the time—referred to my piece as a pile of dinosaur feces before he even knew what it was. Which was great. That was flattering frankly, coming from him. So I wrote this open letter. And then the next day people were coming up to me constantly, saying, Listen, we really want you to do this. Ignore these assholes. We'll do what we can so people, you know—and now that we know what you're doing, it's really interesting. So then I continued building. [01:30:00] 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Do you think you should have had like an informational meeting earlier with everybody or something? 
 JIM SANBORN:  No, I think I just—I think it was better that I let it go like it was. Because it's a weird place to work. You know I mean I saw people there that I'd known my whole life, that I didn't know worked at the agency. And we'd see each other, and it was like they wouldn't look at me. It was like, you know. So you don't know what you can do and what you can't do, you know. So it was a very weird thing. You're followed around 24 hours a day. You have to go to the bathroom with somebody. I mean it's like, you know—so it was very bizarre. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  And you probably had assistants with you on the building. Or were you— 
 JIM SANBORN:  Right. No, I had several people that had to get in every day. You know they had to be U.S. citizens. We had to be screened every day going—all our stuff was screened. And then apparently at night they x-rayed everything that I did actually with neutrons, neutron x-ray machine that could go underground, you know, and see inside petrified trees and stuff like that. So that they knew I didn't plant anything, listening devices on them. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. 
 JIM SANBORN:  So, yes, so there was that kind of stuff going on. And then I was in the midst of building the project, and I was doing a lot of the stone cutting in the parking lot of the agency. And one day I had a whole truckload of these huge slabs on granite that I was putting into the courtyard, had the entire truck disappear. I came in the next morning—left on Friday, came in on Monday—and in this super secure parking lot, no truck, no stone, nothing. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Was this your truck? 
 JIM SANBORN:  No, it wasn't my truck. It was the tractor trailer. They'd left the trailer there with all the slabs on it so I could work. Then they'd come back later and pick up the—never found again. [01:32:00] That entire load disappeared forever. And so I went about two weeks working on other stuff. And the agency just replaced it. Never told me what happened to it. It just vanished. So another intrigue. It just made it very clear that there was a schism at the very highest level of the agency. On the one hand you had William Webster who was the director of Central Intelligence; on the other hand you had his subordinates or his equals on the other side of the aisle, so to speak, who really didn't want it to happen. They didn't want to spend the money on it. They didn't want it to happen. And they did everything they could to subvert the process. So anyway, eventually it got done. And it was like building a ship in a bottle because I had to engineer these huge slabs, bring them in on dollies through these tiny little doors. I could only work from six p.m. 'til two a.m. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Oh, you only worked at night? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. Because of security reasons I couldn't work largely during the day. So the only thing I could do is set out this big buffet. I had this big gourmet buffet set up there that I did every day. Brought out to all the assistants so there was this giant pig-out. They'd work really hard, and had cranes and pumping trucks and everything working at night out there to get the thing done. And we got it done in time. And I filled the pool up with water. There's a pool in—two pools in the central courtyard: this one large pool that had ornamental grasses and [inaudible]. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Well, let's pause for now, and we'll continue later on. Okay? Thank you. 
 [END OF AAA_sanbor09_6590_m.] 
 AVIS BERMAN:  This is Avis Berman continuing the interview with Jim Sanborn on July 15th. We took a break, and now we're starting again. And we were still in the middle of the discussion about Kryptos . I think we had discussed the labor of it and some of the obstacles that some people of the agency were against it, and some people were for it. But what you had not pursued further was that the Department of Historical Intelligence felt unable to take responsibility for the knowledge of the codes. So you had not discussed how you resolved that. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Right. So in addition to my—while I was at CIA, and because I had clearance and this kind of thing, I had access to the agency grounds with my vehicles. On one of my sorties around and being curious, I found a dumpster bay at the agency that contained three huge dumpster containers that were being filled simultaneously by large nozzles coming out of the ceiling. And they were being filled by pulped paper which was made from—in each office at the agency there's a paper bag that says: pulped paper. So then each office at the end of the day, when you have to destroy some secret documents, you put them in this paper bag, and you drop it down a chute, and the chute goes to a hammer mill where water and hammers beat the paper into pulp. [00:02:00] That was done in lieu of shredding because shredding can be reassembled by assiduous adults in large tents in the desert. 
 So the idea was I wanted to see if I could make art out of the paper pulp. So I basically, boldly, insanely stole a bunch of it, and put it in the back of my car in five-gallon pails, and took it to the studio and made a few things out of it, and discovered that it worked very well. So that was a bargaining chip that I used when I traded the code to William Webster at the dedication ceremony, in exchange for access to the paper pulp. The paper pulp was interesting because it had a lot of content. It had pieces of jets on the runway, top secret stamps, photographs of—at the time it was 1991 or so—1990, 1991—and there were images of Middle Eastern architecture all over the place. So I found the material to be excellent for making large paper reliefs and free-standing artwork out of it. So I made a deal. And so at the dedication ceremony I traded what I told William Webster was the entire code to Kryptos ; but whether I told him the truth remains to be seen. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. Well, when you say you traded, I mean wasn't it a condition already that somebody had to know? So I guess when you say that was your bargaining chip, you had to tell them anyway. 
 JIM SANBORN:  I didn't necessarily have to tell them. I mean I didn't necessarily have to tell them in a way. Well, this is the CIA, and they're not exactly straightforward in their dealings. [00:04:00] So who's to say I have to be straightforward in my dealings? Granted I didn't want to do anything which would upset the agency. On the other hand, I was playing their game. I mean I had already decided that I was going to have to be burdened with a secret the rest of my life, much as every CIA agent is. So I wanted something in response [laughs] back for that. And so I got access to the pulp. And I didn't necessarily give them the whole code. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. Okay. Yes. Because in other words—so they had to on some level take it on faith that you had not put in anything, as you said, pornographic or Communistic or whatever else they were concerned about. 
 JIM SANBORN:  That's right. Whatever else. And, you know, there was no sense in putting something in there that would jeopardize its very existence because it would not live for the 20 years it has already lived. And that would be unfortunate for all those people who do seriously still appreciate it. And the minions that are continuing to learn about it with the increase in eyes over there at the agency. I mean it's gotten vastly larger than it was when I was there. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. Well, at the time also—you said you knew you were going to have press. But you didn't know what the spiral would become. Did it bother you at all that at the time maybe that it was pretty much only people at the agency who would see it, as opposed to a wider public? 
 JIM SANBORN:  I knew from the day I did it that the wider public would know it and see it. I was getting continuous requests from the media about shooting pieces in there. The media had been largely excluded from the CIA. [00:06:00] And so none of the networks had any videotape of what the inside of the CIA looked like. They were never permitted to do it. So with Kryptos and with William Webster wanting to somehow improve the image of the agency, he decided to open the floodgates. So that was—I was aware of that even as I was writing the text. So very quickly, before the dedication even, and way before that, the [ Washington ]* Post* was writing articles about it, there were cartoons about it. There was—I was on Good Morning America within days of the dedication ceremony. I hit every single network. I saw myself on Chinese television in China. It went global within two days of the dedication. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  So is that because looking at the sculpture at first was a Trojan Horse into seeing the CIA? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Absolutely! Yes, absolutely. So they still use it. I mean there's Fox Network today uses it every day. Anything about the CIA, there's a clip of my artwork on it. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. But is it—do you see the CIA or do you just see the sculpture? 
 JIM SANBORN:  No, you see the CIA behind it, you know, whatever. But the sculpture has become typified as CIA and secrecy. So I mean it just became, you know— 
 AVIS BERMAN:  A symbol. 
 JIM SANBORN:  It became a symbol. And they picked it up, and everybody else has picked it up as an easy way to explain the work of the organization, so— 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Yes. I mean were they—and also within two days were they talking about the code and cracking the code? Or was it just— 
 JIM SANBORN:  Oh, absolutely. The fact that they paid a quarter of a million dollars for something they can't figure out was a big deal. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. Well, but at the time, you probably expected that people would have figured it out sooner. [00:08:00] 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes, I assumed that people would figure it out in a matter of weeks, and some might have but they didn't say anything. But on the other hand—I also knew the agency well enough to know that if I didn't tell Webster the whole story, and the dedication ceremony occurred and everything happened and all this stuff, it's not like they could admit that I duped them. They could never admit that I pulled one over on them. So they were in a position of total—I mean, you know, total submission to what I was doing as well. And so the whole idea of the piece is that I was going to play their game the same way, you know—I was going to play their game. So they had to be prepared, you know, and they had to trust me on one level. So on one level, they don't trust anybody, and I don't trust them. So that was a fine relationship. The last time I was at the agency after I did the piece was ABC News—I arrived at the agency to pick up a load of paper pulp in my truck. I'd rented a warehouse to store the stuff in to dry it quickly, because the agency was canceling the program of pulping. And they were actually going to pulp and then burn the stuff to power the agency. Which they did ultimately. 
 So I had to collect a huge quantity of it. So I was there on one of my routine missions. And ABC News decided to do a story about the paper pulp. And they wanted to film me leaving the agency with a truckload of pulp. And I arrived at the door, at the main front gate, and I told them I'm on my way in. And this ABC News crew is going to film me leaving, and will stay out in the parking lot until I come out. And so somebody said, Hey, listen, you've got a phone call. [00:10:00] So I go over, and I get this phone call. And the person at the other end of the phone said, "Mr. Sanborn, you're not going to get filmed today." And I said, "Well, what do you mean I'm not going to get filmed? You know, I mean what's the big deal?" He said, "Mr. Sanborn, you're not going to get filmed today." I said, "Well, I'm not getting filmed where? Here, or I mean—what about out on Route 123, out in front there?" "Mr. Sanborn, you're not getting filmed anywhere in the world today." And I said, "Oh, really!" And then hung up the phone. And went in and got my paper pulp. And came out while the ABC News pulled out of the agency parking lot, down Route 123, on the public highway, Dolley Madison Boulevard, and pulled off on a side street in order to capture me behind the CIA sign at Dolley Madison Boulevard, just passing the sign. 
 So I exited the agency. And as soon as I went through the main gate, all hell broke loose. And all these sirens went off. And all these loudspeakers. And CIA vehicles pulled in front of me and behind me, and escorted me out of the agency, down Dolley Madison Boulevard. I looked over at the ABC News crew, and they were at a tug-of-war with their camera. The agency police were trying to take their camera to destroy their film. And so basically I kept going. And then they made me stop while they corralled the ABC crew, put them in their van, and then escorted both of us to the edge of town, which was all the way down about 15 miles from the agency, where they cut away and let us alone to drive to DC. And I didn't go back for 16 years. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  And when would that have been? 
 JIM SANBORN:  It's in the book. [00:12:00] It's like very late 1990 or very early 1991. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. And do you have any idea of why this happened? 
 JIM SANBORN:  No. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Just one of those rules but there are no rules? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. It's either the schism at the top, or there was a struggle. The public affairs department at CIA was staffed—one of the main members was a former director of ABC News. And my ex-wife was with ABC News. And there are always struggles between ABC News in particular and the CIA in order for them to avoid the appearance of favoritism. And so I think ABC might have been trying to do one story too many. But on the other hand, I have no idea. And we got the bum's rush. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Yes. It's amazing that you could—but you were until that time pretty allowed access to go in and out, pick up stuff. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Oh, yes, yes. Sure. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Yes, yes. Right. And I guess—when did, shall we say, kind of a benign fame about Kryptos began to escalate and maybe get more unpleasant or more threatening or whatever sort of thing began to happen? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Well, within a few months I started getting stuff from the agency. I didn't even have a computer at that time, I don't think. So they started faxing me stuff. Like the guy who wrote the Bible code—I don't know, some French guy—he sent a fax to the agency with the code cracked, more or less equating me with, [00:14:00] it was me and Satan and Jesus Christ, all in the same coded stream. And then there was another one extremely—15-page document—with these elaborate color graphics about decoding Kryptos into it's being entirely about the War of 1812. And then other documents, usually 12, 14 pages. I mean they took months and months and months of work to do these things. But nothing—none of them cracking the code. And so that went on and on for years where I'd get a trickle of stuff. 
 Then maybe five years or more later I met someone at a party that said they loved my website. And I said, "What website?" And so I went—I went to my computer, which I had at that time, and found out there was  Elonka Dunin's Kryptos website. And it was basically a catalogue raisonne of all the work that I had done, at least a lot of it, gleaned from public sources. And she'd done a very good job of it. So I called her up, and she came to DC. We met, and immediately we hit it off. And so I trusted her implicitly and gave her then as much—as many images as I possibly could for her to scan. So she basically set this whole thing up. She made the website that was paid up for 50 years [00:16:00]. It's not something that she's necessarily enthusiastic about doing anymore. But she continues to do it nonetheless and updates it every day. Very interesting, you know, informative thing. So that was great. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. But she also was involved in trying to solve the code, too. Isn't she part of the group that's working on that? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes, there's no doubt about it. Her major motivation for getting involved in all of this was to find out what the code was if I made some slip. She figured the closer she could get to me, the more chance there was for me to make a slip. And I found that interesting. I knew I wasn't going to mess up. But it also enabled her; she gave lectures actually to a packed auditorium at CIA, a packed auditorium at NSA, a Hackers' Convention in Las Vegas, and many other venues, and made a major career out of being Kryptos 's maven. Which is fine because it took a lot of it out of my— 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Yes, you didn't have to do it. 
 JIM SANBORN:  I didn't have to deal with it. I have to make a quick call while I remember. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Sure. Go ahead. 
 JIM SANBORN:  It reminded me—[audio break.] 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Okay. And I had asked you before we took a break if Kryptos , if things—when things began to get less benign. You were discussing various long faxes that you had received. And then you had a computer. And then I guess—was it the advent of the Internet that— 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. Definitely. I mean, I know that when I first Googled it, when I first Googled Kryptos , I got like, oh, 550, you know. The next time I Googled it two years later, it was 550,000. And you know, now, whatever. And so it became a geometric progression in readership and all of that. And I still was pretty much ignoring it. [00:18:00] I wasn't paying any attention to it much. Until eight years after the dedication, ABC—John Martin of ABC News—called me and said that a couple of guys had cracked the code, and would I do another ABC piece about it? So I agreed to do that. So that's when I read, you know, that I could corroborate that they actually had cracked part of it. And that started a whole other, you know, thing. And, you know, the fact that nobody could get, including NSA who had tried to get it, hadn't gotten the final section. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  I mean were you amazed at how good you were at doing this? Or how long you had kept people baffled? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Quite frankly I wasn't that aware of how extensively it was being pecked away at. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. 
 JIM SANBORN:  But, you know, I mean, aside from the people who had devoted some portion, some major portions, of their lives to it, it was also being used by a school for brain-damaged people to enable them to function better. So it was having a beneficial effect on a large group. And that's one of the things that Elonka [Dunin] told me. So it was that kind of thing. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. And meanwhile is the CIA happy with the work? Are their attitudes changing that you know about? I mean until you weren't there for a while? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Well, yes. I mean they certainly embraced it. When they realized—I mean, the CIA was—at one point they were getting 25,000 hits a day on it, on their website, to the point where it just got totally out of control. And I don't know how many they're getting a day now, but it's probably a whole lot. [00:20:00] So they realized fairly quickly that it was a PR tool that they could use for recruitment and everything else. And they do use it for that. They also train the cryptography people on it as well. And then the thing after that, after that John Martin thing, the next thing was basically *Wired *magazine online wrote the news about The Da Vinci Code [Dan Brown] connection, and the fact that it was on the cover. The code had come out a couple of years before, but I didn't know anything about it. And I didn't know that part of the code was on the cover of The Da Vinci Code until this article came out. And then started a whole other level of interest in the piece. And then when Brown said, you know, it would be in his next book, that triggered another level. So from there it just went up, and then the new Wired piece came out just you know—reiterated it all, written by a very smart guy who treated it very well. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. Right. Now I can't remember the cover of The Da Vinci Code . Was it some code writing? Was it an image of the sculpture? 
 JIM SANBORN:  No, no. It's hard to find. [Inaudible.] If you take this over there and you look at this in the sun, your longitude and latitude coordinates are right there. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Oh, okay. I see. Is that— 
 JIM SANBORN:  Then here, right here, if you hold this in a mirror, these little white letters here, it says "ONLY WW KNOWS" backwards. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  And that's— 
 JIM SANBORN:  Only William Webster. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Only William Webster knows. Oh, okay. So at this moment, yes, he really—I mean as I look at this, I never would have figured it out. [00:22:00] I would've just thought it was all Leonardo's mirror writing instead of other things. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Right. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  So you really, yes, you have to look. So it wasn't— 
 JIM SANBORN:  His new book is completely covered with that stuff. And I don't know if Kryptos is in there or not. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm, mm-hmm [affirmative]. So this was sort of—well, this could have been the cover designer who thought about this. Or do you think it was Dan Brown himself? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Oh, I'm sure Dan Brown knew about it. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Jacket design by Michael J. Windsor. That's all I—I'm just reading on that. I mean it could have been the graphics designer. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes, it's a serious marketing tool, whatever it is. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Yes. Mm-hmm, mm-hmm [affirmative]. So, you know, anyway so that happened. Now in terms of the notoriety, did you ever regret doing this piece on any level? Or from the anxiety that it caused you? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Not unless it kills me. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  [Laughs] I shouldn't laugh at that. 
 JIM SANBORN:  To date. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. 
 JIM SANBORN:  No, it's been the Energizer bunny of any artwork I could make. But I don't—the fact that it was picked up by this popular culture and The Da Vinci Code thing, which introduced religion into my work—because I told you that Dan Brown said on Good Morning America that it was "only WW" meant Mary Magdalene actually upside down. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Yes. 
 JIM SANBORN:  That introduced a level of religion into it; and considering that I'm something of an agnostic, atheist, whatever, it's difficult for me to tolerate. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Yes, well, I'm sure the CIA wouldn't have wanted any religious connotations either. You know, I want to ask you at this point, now that we're past Kryptos —also, wait a minute. Before that, you had the main sculpture, and then you worked on a plaza area, too, right? With the outcroppings and all. And then you had said something about an interior that got screwed up. Or did you mean Matt Mullican when you said that? [00:24:00] Or something of yours that got screwed up? 
 JIM SANBORN:  No, nothing got screwed up. I mean there's an outdoor component to the piece which is in front of the new building, which is a stone outcropping. Then there's—in the interior there's a stone outcropping also, and those two are parallel to each other. So if you see them from an airplane, they look like they're lined up like they were geological strata. Yes. So I mean the outside has very simple codes, and the inside has complicated code. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. And even though this was getting so expensive, they didn't give you any more money in terms of budget? 
 JIM SANBORN:  No. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  And also when you were working on this, was the GSA involved in any of— Was there a project manager or anyone else who was running interference or doing anything else? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. There was a project manager that was interfering. [Laughs] I mean, you know, there's not much, I mean, a project manager can do at the CIA. Because the project manager's got somebody following him around, too. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. 
 JIM SANBORN:  And I generally found that if the project manager's leaving me alone, I'm much, much happier because I pride myself in what I do. And there have been project managers in GSA projects that I have done who in some way make things happen to make it appear like the only reason the artwork got done right was because of them. That is an extremely frustrating experience to endure. Especially if you have pride in what you do. It's a pride-killer, I think, for a lot of people. [00:26:00] I mean, why bother? I'll just do whatever the hell I want to do and let him clean up the mess, if he's going to be that way. And so there is always that tendency with a project manager; it depends on how much they get involved. And I'm sure there are artists who are flaky enough that the project manager has something to do that's necessary. But in my case, I mean, every time those people have been involved, it's been hard for me to tolerate because they try to take credit for your every move. And, you know, I mean it's ridiculous. But that's the reality of it. But most of the time it was fine. The project managers were way in the background. But I don't remember who it was at CIA. But for me they're kind of an extraneous individual appendage that wasn't necessary. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  When did the CIA stop following you—if they have stopped following you? [Laughs.] 
 JIM SANBORN:  Oh, I have no idea. I don't know. I never went back out there after that period of time. I mean I'm—right. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  No, because you were saying, you know, in other words, while you were doing the project, they were following you and tapping your phones and doing all of that. 
 JIM SANBORN:  They could've been. Or somebody was. Possibly. I don't know. Maybe not. Maybe I'm thinking—putting too much into it. But I, you know, probably Ed Scheidt the cryptographer had a problem with it. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Of course, yes, that would—right. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Right. I figured, okay, if Ed is paranoid about this, I think I'd better be paranoid about it. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Did things change—I mean, now you were done—I mean this was done during the Bush I [one] Administration. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Right. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  And did things change when—I mean you were done with it—but when Clinton came? 
 JIM SANBORN:  I was done with it. I was out of there. I mean, you know, my only protector was William Webster. [00:28:00] He was strongly behind the project and the initiator of the whole thing. And he is a very smart, very savvy, great guy. I mean, a couple of years later when he retired from the agency, he said on Face the Nation that the hardest secret he had to keep was the Kryptos sculpture. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Fascinating. And that would be—you know, you would think some horrible thing that the agency had done would be a harder secret. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Exactly. 
 You want some more water? There's another water thing here. Have you got some in there? 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Oh, I guess there is some there. There's still some. Thank you. 
 Okay. Now I want to ask you because I wanted to get this—I don't want to call it a hurdle, but we really had to, particularly had to talk about—oh, I know what I want to ask you: Is there anything that you would improve or change, looking back on the piece, that you would do— 
 JIM SANBORN:  On Kryptos ? 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Yes. 
 JIM SANBORN:  No. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Okay. 
 JIM SANBORN:  No, I went out there to check the condition report, and it's perfect. The only thing that happened is they ran into it with a machine or something. Some crane or something hit it and knocked one of the plates. And I showed them how to fix it with a sledgehammer. And that's the way it was left. It was in good shape. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. Now in terms of conservation, I think that's important, what needs to be done to keep it the way it should be? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Whatever they're doing, they're doing the right thing. I mean that particular piece involves very little maintenance. The only tricky part is the pools, the water; and one of the pools of water, the circular pool, which is supposed to be spinning around wildly, wasn't spinning and actually wasn't filled with water for the last couple of years, and it was sort of collecting debris. Well, I showed them what the problem was with that. But that needs some stewardship. But they had actually, I think—I'm not sure they had my original maintenance instructions—but after 20 years they could've been misplaced. [00:30:00] You know, I don't know how you, you know, can keep things like that for so long. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. 
 JIM SANBORN:  But that's an issue. And I don't know. It probably something that GSA should—GSA would do well to keep an archive of these maintenance booklets and just resend them every five years to whoever owns a piece. I think it would do very well because they do disappear. And anyway. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. Well, what I want to ask you now, because clearly your sense of a piece of public art has changed post- Kryptos —or just you've made some. In general, maybe, what you think now. I mean I guess what makes a piece of art public? Patron, location, access? You know as opposed to a big piece of outdoor work, which was your initial conception. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Well, I mean it has to have a presence. It has to have a significant presence. It should operate somehow with the sun, some light; it should interact with the sun in some way, day and night. It should be effective at night. After Kryptos —and because of Kryptos —I more or less invented the signature pieces that I've done 12 or 13 of since Kryptos with these projection cylinders. And the first projection cylinder I did was at the Corcoran [00:32:00] in an exhibition just a year—1992—a couple of years after the dedication ceremony. And it was basically a bronze cylinder with a light inside. 
 I did one for GSA. And then I've done several for the universities around the country. And basically they're text-based magic lantern types of pieces with a pinpoint and a very particular kind of light inside that projects the text over a very wide area. So you can make a small piece; but it has an effect, it has a very large effect over a very wide area. So in addition to having this lighting effect, it also then projects the content of the text that I've written, or that somebody has written, that's on the work over the large area. So it's sort of a metaphor for enlightenment. And so I did a piece for Florida Power and Light and for the City of Fort Myers, Florida. And I used two projection cylinders: The text on one cylinder—it was for Florida Power and Light, which seemed logical; the title is Lux [2001], L-U-X. And so one cylinder had listed all of the materials that Thomas Edison had studied for the light bulb filament in Fort Myers, Florida, in his Fort Myers, Florida, laboratory. So he had a lab in Fort Myers in which he tested all of the filament possibilities. And so it was very apropos to that area and to Florida Power and Light and things like that. 
 So the other cylinder there on the particular site where that artwork was, it was formerly an [00:34:00] Indian city or village—large village/city. And it had been abandoned before the colonial period. But artifacts had remained there. And so that piece related the Creek/Seminole migration legend from Oklahoma to Florida, which was how the Seminoles ended up populating Florida—and how they ended up leaving, going out to Oklahoma, etc. So that was one instance where, you know, the projection cylinder operated on several levels. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  These weren't in code, though. These were legible texts. 
 JIM SANBORN:  That particular one, the first one I did, was in code. The Cyrillic Projector , and it was all in Russian. And there was one English word in it which was Medusa because, you know, the gaze of Medusa could turn you to stone. So the Russian text that was on this piece was all about KGB operations and CIA operations carried out about Russia—carried out against Russia—and KGB operations carried out against the USA. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Wait a minute. I'm confused. This is on the Florida Power and Light one? 
 JIM SANBORN:  No, that's different. The first one I did, the very first one, I showed at the Corcoran. Okay? 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. 
 JIM SANBORN:  That piece was sold to the University of North Carolina-Charlotte, and it's in between their arts building and their communications buildings. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. And this is the one in Cyrillic? 
 JIM SANBORN:  That's in Cyrillic. It's called the Cyrillic Projector [1997]. And the code—all the code people wanted to crack that one also. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Was that one cracked? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. That was fairly easy. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Probably couldn't go through another Kryptos in terms of intensity there. [00:36:00] And then Lux was something one could read. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes, that one could read. But what I introduced as a result—in order that the work would retain interest was that I started using international language texts. So like the piece for Fort Myers actually the list of plant species is all in Latin. The one that listed the Creek migration legend was in Creek. My other pieces use a variety of languages, as many as 10 or 15 languages on each piece. So, maybe one line in English or something. But that allows peoples of different cultures to collaborate on deciphering what the piece says. So in a way it's like a code. And so it's a language code. And then I also use—I've used about four or five different Native American languages. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Well, that must also give it graphic interest because it's— 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. Well, fonts are beautiful things, especially like, you know, Greek and Russian and Arabic and all these other fonts. And I've used all the Chinese, and I've used all the languages. And I really enjoy seeing them visually. And so, yes, I'm hoping that they operate as dramatic projectors and as dramatic content kinds of pieces. Although their forms are rigidly similar: a variety of cylindrical forms, some taller, some shorter, but largely cylindrical. Some spiral. But mostly to just enhance the projection effect. And I basically came up with the idea because I had two pieces of Kryptos , these big sheets. [00:38:00] I had these two pieces in my studio. So for some reason I was shining a light through it or something like that, and I realized that if I could pinpoint light—I took two of the pieces while they were still in my studio and brought them together into a cylinder and put a light inside it, and it worked so well that, you know, that's what started the whole thing. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  And so—I guess I'm going to discuss the GSA commissions. And I guess the next one would have been Ex Nexum , is that correct, the Bankruptcy Courthouse? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  And how did that commission start? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Well again, it's another GSA, and I was selected. I was told that I was on the short list. And I was called weeks later saying that I had won it. Then the usual, you know, making a maquette and submitting it to a panel situation I think I was asked to give—first time. That piece was—it was interesting to me just because it was Bill Clinton's town. And bankruptcy and all of this business, there were all these issues with that town at the time with the administration. So it was sort of fun doing it down there. And then I did a lot of research in Greek and Latin about bankruptcy law. And then determined that I'd do a piece about the transition from Draconian legal practice, which as we all know is brutal, to Justinian legal practice, which we all know is justice. And so there was the transition from the Draconian to the Justinian that is listed on the three metal panels that comprise the artwork. And then on one side is a block of red granite and another block of black granite, meaning to be in the red and in the black from an accounting standpoint. [00:40:00] 
 AVIS BERMAN:  And the panel that passed it would've been the Washington panel, is that correct, the people in DC? Or is this someone in Arkansas as well, a group in Arkansas? 
 JIM SANBORN:  That I don't know, because I wasn't privy to the panel for that one. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. And when you went down there, did you get to meet with the judges, the people who work in the courthouse? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes, I think so. A site visit. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. And did they have any requests or demands or things that they asked for? 
 JIM SANBORN:  No. Which is great. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Yes. Because no one said to you—and I mean— 
 JIM SANBORN:  I wouldn't take it if they did. I mean I generally will not take a commission if I'm required to do a certain thing. I won't take it. I mean there are many commissions I have not chosen to participate in or go for if they have a requirement like that. Or even offer a theme. If anything is offered, I won't take it. I have to be the genesis of my theme. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. So were there any problems in the execution or as time went on about this? 
 JIM SANBORN:  No. It was all very straightforward. The GSA commissions are the easiest commissions I have had. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Because? 
 JIM SANBORN:  It's streamlined. Granted, I've met many artists who have had the opposite experience. But I've had a perfect—I mean every experience for me, at least at this point in time—and maybe you forget how difficult they were—but I've always felt as if the GSA commissions were the best-handled of all the commissioning processes that I've gone through. And some of them are absolute hell. And GSAs are not. [00:42:00] And I know that it's been streamlined a lot where, you know, the contracts are shorter now. You know they're not an inch and a half thick. They're a little thinner and easier to deal with. And the payment's always very straightforward and on time. And I thought they were very well handled. And they were responsible in following through and making sure things worked out. And that's all. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Because, well, of course I guess they could also see what they were getting. But I ask this because in interviews with some of the other artists, both abstract and [inaudible] and figurative, courthouses seem to be, I don't want to say a problem, but the judges always come out and say I want this, I want someone with a white robe, I want, you know, I want this that and the other. That I'm just curious that no one had an idea about this one. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Well, I was always dealing with justice theory or the history of, you know, jurisprudence. They didn't have any way to criticize that. That made it all very easy. Because I don't make figurative things. They knew also what they were getting into. They were part of the panels, and the courthouse pieces all involved panels. So I was in that way fortunate in that my subject matter and content disallowed, you know, having to be changed. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. And did you find this an effective piece as far— 
 JIM SANBORN:  I don't think I ever saw the little booklet, to tell you the truth. I don't even have one of those. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  I'll give it to you. 
 JIM SANBORN:  That's great. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Oh, yes. Yes, Jennifer sent it to me. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes, I never saw it. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  I mean, did you—in terms of the people using this, I mean, did you find— I mean I don't know how you judge if a piece has been effective because Kryptos is such an exception to everything. [00:44:00] 
 JIM SANBORN:  Oh, I remember going to the dedication ceremony, and everybody was very happy about it. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm, mm-hmm [affirmative]. 
 JIM SANBORN:  You know? I mean everybody was very pleased. And I know that the one at Greenbelt was also received pretty well. I never had too much criticism. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  And was this something you would do differently in terms of changing it, looking back? 
 JIM SANBORN:  No. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  And how about conservation of this piece? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Again, it's a really simple conservation. I mean the granite's not going to change at all. It's so big and heavy—unless you have to clean graffiti off of it, it's not really an issue. The bronze is the same way. Unless somebody tries to vandalize it. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  And have you heard any— Well, would you have been told if someone did? 
 JIM SANBORN:  I haven't been told anything about that one. The one at the University of North Carolina-Charlotte has been vandalized, yes. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  In what way? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Somebody broke letters off. Stuck a crowbar or something in there, wrecked parts of it. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Did they fix it? 
 JIM SANBORN:  No. Not as far as I know. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Has there been other work that's been vandalized? 
 JIM SANBORN:  No. 
 [Audio break.] 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right now I'm just going to hand this [inaudible] over to you so you can have it. 
 JIM SANBORN:  I don't know that I ever saw it. Don't know. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Well, in general, and again let's except Kryptos , is there anything in particular that you have to consider when the government is your client as opposed to a corporation or an individual? 
 JIM SANBORN:  [00:46:00] Well, I mean—the pieces that I've generally done, I've done so many of them for different places, that at this point it's almost formulaic in the way I build them. And it's made them very easy to get completed. Because the process is somewhat standardized. And the company that cuts out the water-jet panels and all of that, I've been working with for almost 20 years, and that process has gotten better all the time. So, you know, they take less time to cut them and all that stuff. The only trouble that I've had with any of the cylinders on college campuses is people throw beer cans in them. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Oh, like over the top. 
 JIM SANBORN:  The big trash can. But that's not unusual. It doesn't happen at bankruptcy courts. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Well, then let's—I think that the next one you did—now this is on Indian Run [1994]? Do you have this book? Okay. And I guess this seems a little different to me in terms of—I mean not just the cylinder, but it looks like you've done a whole park or a whole—you've done a lot more—you've done a lot of landscape in here. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Well, at CIA, too, I think one of the original commissions now since 1990, this was—they added some more by including landscaping on it. So I did— 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Yes. 
 JIM SANBORN:  So I embellished the sites. I tried to—in general I tried to modify the site landscape to integrate my piece into that landscape. [00:48:00] So that it's less plop art, you know, than it would be otherwise. That piece obviously is like a serpent now with its serpentine walkways. You know the Indian Serpent Mound . 
 AVIS BERMAN:  In Ohio? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. There's one in Indiana, too. And that piece, I mean, that was fun because I seeded the site with 10,000 arrowheads after I'd built it. And so that's always been curious. And I'm sure I've driven the Maryland State Historical Society hysterical because people walking in say, "Hey, I found this arrowhead out there at Greenbelt Courthouse. What do you think?" And I had them all made in Mexico. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Oh, yes, I was going to ask you about that. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. So I'm sure they just keep turning up in gardens and things like that. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  It seems like it would be hard to cut the grass if those were hitting a lawnmower. 
 JIM SANBORN:  No, they don't get a lot. Most of them are buried. I mean most of them by this time have sunk down, you know, and discovered when someone puts pipe in or something. But those pieces are far more complicated. I mean the water features, the pools I did at CIA are very expensive. The budgets often don't—they don't reflect the expense of including the water feature. And they're also very expensive to maintain. So on some of these I was pushing my limits as far as how much I could do water-feature-wise for the budget. How much they were willing to do from a maintenance standpoint. And I know that the water feature for Greenbelt has been difficult to keep from leaking. The one at CIA has just been perfect. But that one's [inaudible]. That I probably would have done differently, but I couldn't afford to do it differently. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  In what way would you have done it differently? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Well, the one I did at CIA, [00:50:00] I built a concrete pool for the whole thing. This one has a rubber-lined streambed. And the rubber-lined streambed just doesn't hold up any more than 10 years before it's got to be rebuilt. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. It's like a regular swimming pool, but it's worse because it's more used. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes, and it just runs all day. And so they end up losing a lot of money in water. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  And then you've got this stonework that you did, too. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes, I did that in the middle of a terrible, terrible winter. Unbelievable! Right in February snowstorms. Zero degrees. By myself, the whole wall. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Just going back to the Arkansas piece here. Because this is distorted. Is it this close to this wall, this rusticated wall on this older building that looks kind of— 
 JIM SANBORN:  About 20 feet away. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Yes. Richardsonian [ph] here because in terms of integrating this, it was— 
 JIM SANBORN:  It was just the original building that was there. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. Let me just— 
 JIM SANBORN:  And the only other one was IRS, I guess. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Well, this is this—is that this? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes, that's IRS. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Which is Martinsburg [West Virginia] Computing Center? And that's an IRS building? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. That's where the football fields are underground. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Of old tax returns? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. 
 JIM SANBORN:  And that's my Social Security number on that front cover there. My Social Security number and my girlfriend's number and two of my assistants' Social Security numbers and everybody's Social Security number that I knew. There's mine right there. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Yes. Don't put that on the tape anymore, if you think you— 
 JIM SANBORN:  Oh, trust me, I wasn't going to finish. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Oh, okay. No, no, don't put where it starts. [00:52:00] We don't want people to realize that—maybe they're figured out that they're Social Security numbers already. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Well, sure. It's called Social Security Seating [1999]. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. Okay. 
 JIM SANBORN:  That's the title of the work. I told them what it was. It was tempting them do that if I ever got audited, I'd blame it on them having my Social Security number under their nose. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. Oh, no, no, it's just in this age of identity theft, I just hated to have—I thought you might put your Social Security on this—I mean, I'm not paranoid about me. But I'd hate to see that happen. Now let me just pause for a second here. [Audio break.] Why don't you tell me about the procedure and the genesis and, you know, sort of going into working for IRS here? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes, they gave us another tour where I saw the robotic football-field-sized rooms, which I was very impressed by. And the fact that they used magnetic storage at the time. They could've changed it by now, but I don't know. And since I had a lodestone, large, magnetized lodestone, lying around just waiting for a home, a nice 11-ton lodestone that everyone would like to have, I decided to use that and make it the focal point of the piece. So I basically picked up on the magnetic tape head kind of theory and went with that and made a maquette, you know, very precise maquette. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. I think we need to say that the magnetic tape because you told me about that at lunch, but you didn't put it on the tape: that when you saw this, what you saw you should explain about the robots going. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Well, storage devices for computers are of different types: There are laser storage devices, and then there are magnetic, which are generally old technology, magnetic storage. But basically, the robots in the football-[field]-sized rooms are running back moving magnetic storage tapes around to update people's files. [00:54:00] So basically the information is stored on a metallic tape, and the information is stored magnetically. So in front of the Martinsburg facility, I installed a large lodestone and two sheets of copper. And basically, the copper was going in one side in English characters, and it's the names of all the presidents and secretaries of treasury in the United States. Then coming out the backside of the magnetic thing is all zeroes and ones. So I converted all the presidents names into binary code. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. 
 JIM SANBORN:  And then the problem was that since the thing is magnetized, and since the security badges that everybody wears that goes in and out of the Martinsburg facility are magnetic, people couldn't walk up to this lodestone without demagnetizing their badge and they couldn't get in the agency. So I put a red ring around in the paving that says magnetic, so that people would stay away from the stone. But nonetheless that stone now still collects large numbers of magnetic objects—like thousands and thousands of paperclips, thumbtacks; anything that's magnetized gets stuck on it. People bring up there and bring their little metal offerings to the lodestone. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Does that disturb you? 
 JIM SANBORN:  I think it's great. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Okay. You don't mind that stuff is on your stone? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes—no, it's great, personalizing it. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. And then there's in the paving I inlaid a 256-bit chip with 256 stone, one-foot-by-one-foot tiles that has a binary code in it. And so there's an encoded text in the paving section, the square paving section. And then the Social Security Seating is a piece of black granite with Social Security numbers [00:56:00]: my number and so on. And so that's basically the piece. And it went very smoothly. I mean I didn't have much problem with that. You know, working with the architect, trying to incorporate into the architecture and all that. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  And who was the architect? 
 JIM SANBORN:  I have no idea at this point. I think it might have been HOK, but I'm not sure. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  HOK? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes, Hellmuth, Obata and—what is it? HOK. Hellmuth, Obata, and I don't remember who the third one [Hellmuth, Obata & Kassabaum] is. HOK. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  I can look that up. 
 JIM SANBORN:  HOK [inaudible]. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. I think this is the question I haven't asked you: Have you run into any problems on the GSA buildings, any problems with any of the architects? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Not with GSA buildings. Other buildings? Hell yes! But not with GSA. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  So in other projects you might name, architects are not your friends? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Not these days. They're all my competitors. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  So in all of these, the building was already built, and then you came in later in all of these four cases so far? 
 JIM SANBORN:  The buildings were designed, but they weren't necessarily built—particularly Martinsburg. It wasn't, when I went out there to visit it, there was no site. I mean, the building was built, but the landscaping, paving, and everything wasn't in existence yet. So I could make changes in it. And it was the same with the IRS—with CIA—too. I was able to make some changes, although minor, but I was able to initiate changes in the site. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  So that means—okay. Because I always think of the CIA as being in Langley for quite a long time. So this was a new building? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes, this was the new headquarters building; it was connected to the old one. Yes. [00:58:00] Basically, there's a courtyard piece that's sitting in a part of the forest that was there; it went up a hill. And they chain-sawed the forest away and built the building there. And left this little courtyard. Much to the chagrin of the employees. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  That might have been another reason why people were also not happy with you in the beginning if they— 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes, they could have deferred. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Well, they could've—I just meant if you took— 
 JIM SANBORN:  Deflected the blame to me. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Yes. Or also they were—it looked like you were taking a courtyard away. Which I would say would be considered an amenity. And at the bankruptcy court, was that a new addition to an old building? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes, that was purely a new addition to an old building. So it was a no-brainer. I mean, basically, I just said I needed this much area. It needs to be level and flat. And that's it. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. Let me just check something here. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Plus, in the GSA projects, the architects don't generally have any choice. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Yes, they have to have the Percent for Art. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes, they have to have it, and they're stuck with it. I mean, they do have a choice if they're on the panel. I know that [inaudible] was on the panel that I was on—or was one of the architects on the panel. He was completely immutable. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  [Laughs]. Mm-hmm [affirmative]. Let's see. Oh, yes, I wanted—this is a little different because—but it's about the same period. Because I think that this—in doing the magic lanterns, is this leading into photography and projective light for you? [01:00:00] 
 JIM SANBORN:  Well, I did the CIA work, and I did the secrecy work. And I was doing public projects involving some secrecy. And it got to a point where I just got burned out, and I had to leave it all behind for a while and take a break from all the seriousness involved in espionage and just generally holding secrets. And so I, the year before, had gotten a commission—I don't remember what the year was of that one— 
 AVIS BERMAN:  There was something in Iowa. 
 JIM SANBORN:  MIT [ Paleos , 1994]. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Yes, okay. 
 JIM SANBORN:  The MIT project. I did a projection on the floor of the Microbiology Department. And that piece involved the use of a projection system—1994. And I projected on the floor of the Biology Department on a white marble disc a projection of a microscopic slide image. And the images were given to me by the electron microscope scientists of things that they were working on at that time. And so I had slides made and installed a very high, powerful, what's called a theatrical projector in the ceiling with a special lighting system that I designed that would last a very long time. And so it projected the image of the slide on the floor, and it overpowered the ambient lighting. And people could walk into that image. So after doing that, I decided in having that projection system in my studio while I was playing around with it; I tried shining it on a building across the railroad tracks from me and started playing around with various ideas for large format projections because this is a large—it's called a large format projector. 
 So I then got the idea that I wanted to work out west and project on the natural landscape. [01:02:00] So I basically took off '95, '96, and '97 to do large format projections in the desert for two years—three years in the desert and then one year, one summer, three and a half months I went to Ireland and projected in Ireland. And then came back and projected on the coast of Oregon. And out West for a last final time. And it was on that final trip that I discovered Los Alamos. I discovered that—I went to White Sands National Monument in southern New Mexico. And White Sands Monument was just 20 miles south of where the first atomic bomb was exploded. And so while I was at that monument, I collected some books about building the first atomic bomb, and that became my next project, which has, to date, lasted almost 15 years. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. Okay. I don't want to do that right now because I think that's—I kind of want to save that I think for tomorrow. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  As a matter of fact. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Good. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  And also the 1992 and later corporate shows. I think that's what I want to finish with. But I just wanted to make sure— 
 JIM SANBORN:  The projections operated in '95, '96, and '97. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. And there were—was there photography, too? Or was it all projections? 
 JIM SANBORN:  No, well, they were projections. But they were projections in extremely remote areas. And so I had no proof that they had occurred unless I photographed them with a four-by-five camera. So that what I was left with was large, you know, 30-by-36-inch images of the projections on the landscape. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. So the photography was documentation. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. And the photography for me has always been documentation of a sort. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. 
 JIM SANBORN:  And I've always photographed my own work. I couldn't at CIA. But all the other photographs taken of my work are mine. So I've always used it to document. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Yes. [01:04:00] Now what about the CIA photographs of your work? Were you happy with them? Were you allowed to influence them or discuss it with their photographers about what you could get? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Well, the basic requirements at CIA is that you can't have any people's faces in the photographs—either inside the buildings or outside the buildings. So CIA photographs of their grounds are always dark so you can't see through the windows. So we had to photograph it on a weekend when nobody was around. And I was able to look through the cameras of the CIA photographer to frame the shots. So I was able to get the kind of image I wanted. So this tape is going into the Archives? 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Of American Art. 
 JIM SANBORN:  And it's not going to be listened to soon? 
 AVIS BERMAN:  No. And you can put restrictions on it. So the answer is, you can make restrictions about it. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Right. So anyway, so we photographed my piece at CIA, and we took 150 photographs, both large format, four-by-fives, and slides. And basically, we took Kodachrome slides for part of it. And Kodachrome can only be developed at Kodak. But CIA had their own laboratory at Kodak. And so basically, I went in a couple of weeks, and I got all my slide boxes back, like many slide boxes. And of my 150 slides, five were not mine. And you'll have to read my book to find out what I'm doing with them. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Okay. Or what was on them. [Laughs.] Right. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Or what was on them. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Okay. [01:06:00] Well, I look forward to reading it and hope it will be out soon. Okay. Isn't that funny. And you didn't say anything. I also realized about the other GSA pieces. I think we've covered this with Kryptos . But looking back over your larger public art oeuvre, what place might they have—are any of them a departure from this is the— 
 JIM SANBORN:  What was? 
 AVIS BERMAN:  The bankruptcy court, Martinsburg, and Greenbelt: Did you find—did they—do any of them represent new developments or ideas in your work? Or are they in the stream of it? 
 JIM SANBORN:  No, they're just part of a continuum. Each one sort of bled into the next. And in some ways, I mean, it was more about the development or the destruction of my back. So as my projects developed, they got lighter and lighter and lighter, and used less and less and less stone. To the point now where I don't use any stone in my projects anymore because I just can't work with it. So they're all basically metal screens and cylinders now. So that's been the major change. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  So you didn't have any assistants who just did brute strength stuff? 
 JIM SANBORN:  No, because they can ruin their backs, too, and then I get blamed for it or sued or whatever. So it's not worth it. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm, mm-hmm [affirmative]. Right. What do you consider the last public art piece that you did? 
 JIM SANBORN:  You mean just recently? 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Well, you said to me at lunch that you're not in public art anymore. And what I'm doing is I want to lead into what we should talk about— 
 JIM SANBORN:  Well, they aren't finished yet. There's two of them right now. They've been—the artwork is done, the cylinders are done, and the other screens are done. And they're being stored in two different locations [01:08:00]: one is being stored at Thomas Jefferson University in Philadelphia, downtown Philadelphia, to be installed sometime in November; the other one is being stored in Maryland, to be installed in a private project near White Flint in Rockville, Maryland. And that's going to be installed sometime in 2010. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  So you have a public piece in Philadelphia. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  And is it going to be there at Thomas Jefferson? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes, it's right in the center of the campus at Thomas Jefferson. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. Okay. Because, as I said, you had said to me, so I kind of wanted to explore that idea that you felt you weren't in it anymore and where that came from and what happened. And what you mentioned— 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes, unless, I mean, unless—I'm not applying for RFQs anymore, Request For Qualifications. If GSA has a project that they will include me in, I'll go for that. But I'm not—or somebody has a private commission they want me to do. Or somebody has a program they want a piece for, and they come directly to me, and they want me to do it, I'll do it, certainly. But I'm not going to compete anymore. I can't do it. Competition is just too extreme and dumbed down. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Well, you had said that public art is really different from what it was in the '80s and '90s. Could you elaborate on that? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Well, I think recently—recently part of the problem is there are a whole lot of architecture firms and not enough to do. So they're turning to public art. And apparently they're being accepted. And I find it galling to have what you call a public art program but actually it's a public architecture program. It's called Art and Public Architecture. [01:10:00] But now a large portion of any—I've talked to quite a few people who have been on panels for public art projects in the last five years. And I would venture to say two-thirds of the short-listed people, and sometimes 100 percent of the short-listed people, are architects:  architects—teams of architects—two architects, an artist with an architect, or just a straight architect, or an architect that fancies himself as a sculptor and whatever. But it's— 
 What it's done is that it's created a situation in which a lot of artists who are just artists can't compete. And the problem is that architecture firms are pretty much graphically oriented. And they have large staffs, in general, who just specialize in putting together very slick presentations. And they can speak architecture. Okay? So on every panel, including GSA panels and other art panels around the country, usually the architect for the building is on the panel; or maybe the architect and the landscape architect are on the panel. And so what happens is—you know, there's always been a movement toward using an architect as opposed to using a contractor when you build the structure. The AIA, the American Institute—I mean—is it the AIA? 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Yes. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. The AIA and a lot of organizations stress the fact that you're not going to get a building built right unless you hire an architect. Or you're not going to get a building to look right, if you don't hire an architect. And so this has been going on for many years. [01:12:00] And so it doesn't take a sophisticated panelist, if they're not an architect, to be told and to understand that, well, if we want this project built right, and we can trust that the person who's going to build it can manage the multi hundreds of thousands of dollars that's involved here, we need to hire an architect, not an artist. Because artists are basically flaky people with alternative lifestyles, who can't manage money and make strange things. So the stereotypes tend to be inflated both ways. And it doesn't weigh favorably on the artist's side. It weighs very favorably on the architect's side. And I find it tragic because what we're getting is a lot of architecture—I mean, a lot of public art that's really architecturally inspired. Or if it's a trained architect who makes sculpture on the side or makes sculpture, or their rendition of sculpture, which is usually at least in the things that I have seen have been fairly traditional but have very slick architectural presentations—to the point where you have a three-dimensional virtual walk-around through the entire city, up to the artwork, around the artwork, day and night, seasons past, summer, winter, fall, all occurring on a very slick, virtual presentation on a large projection screen. 
 Then the artist steps up with a small model made out of clay or glass or ceramic or whatever it is, and it's not as impressive. [01:14:00] And these presentations blow away the panelists who, at least the unsophisticated ones, automatically say, well, this person is way more qualified than that artist over there, despite the fact that that artist has been working for 30 years. But since that artist is not a computer maven, they can't be that good. So the whole playing field has changed. And I think it's really sad because artists are—artists are not allowed to make buildings. But it seems like architects are allowed to make art. And I find that incredibly discriminatory. I mean, artists aren't allowed to make buildings, design buildings, and build buildings generally from a municipality standpoint, from a governmental standpoint. You need to be accredited. You need to have a license. You need to be a builder, an engineer, or whatever. But you can't just be an artist. But an architect can be an artist anytime they want to be. 
 I just had a huge argument with the guy who won the World Trade Center, the new World Trade Center design. He came to my Fourth of July party. And we had a huge row about this very point, you know. And he was saying, Well, there's no art that's original. There's nothing—there's no art that's original. What difference does it make? I mean I'm an architect. I can make art. What are you talking about? No art is original. I said, "Well, I mean, you know, come and see what I'm doing. How many artists have you seen doing what I'm doing?" Well, he came around after a while, you know. But nonetheless, it was still a very, very difficult sell. But it's one-sided, and it's unfortunate. 
 But there have been artists in the past who have grossly mismanaged money in public art programs. [01:16:00] Grossly mismanaged—or mis-designed or ill-designed, ill-conceived artwork that fell apart. And those artists do need help. But I don't think there's much, you know—I just think it's unfortunate for the world of art because I think creativity is getting lost. And I've talked to a lot of people who have programs—the few, the programs that I—the last eight or so that I have not won, in conversations with the directors of the programs, they're all very disappointed. And they see a trend—the same trend occurring and repeatedly. And find it to be a tragic error. I mean somehow there's no way to—I'm not sure how exactly you improve the situation. But something's got to be done because it's not fair to a lot of artists. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  And these directors who are disappointed were by and large—most of the winners of the competitions chose as architects as opposed to any— 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  So it wasn't another artist they were largely disappointed in. It was the architecture. 
 JIM SANBORN:  They were disappointed—they were disappointed that the architects were snapping up all the art projects, yes. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. 
 JIM SANBORN:  I have two friends who were just, you know, on separate panels, one here in DC, in particular, that, of the five finalists, four of them were architects. There was one artist. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Yes, that's— 
 JIM SANBORN:  But the thing is that it's so extremely expensive to have a computer, a powerful one, to make a three-dimensional, virtual, walk-around artwork, that it's prohibitive. And especially if the artist is mature and has been used to working the same way for 30 years or 20 years or whatever it is, that artist might have gained a tremendous amount of experience in building the projects and is capable of doing it [01:18:00]; but they can't relearn—you can't teach an old dog new tricks. That's not always true. But there are certain tricks that old dogs just don't feel like learning. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Yes. Exactly. 
 JIM SANBORN:  And, you know, it's discriminatory. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Well, it's also a different orientation. Because, yes, if you're doing a piece of public art, presumably it's got to be in harmony with the site, which includes the land and the orientation and the building. But if an architect makes the, quote unquote, "work of art," it's going to be completely subordinated to the architecture. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes, totally. I mean this is the thing. It will not offend the building architect. The architect will defer to the building architect. So most of the time, when it's an architect designs the public art, you don't even know it's there. There's a slightly change in the paving color. There's a slight change in the façade. There's a slight change in the light quality when you walk into the room. It is subliminal to snoring. I mean it's just—it's ridiculous! You know. And then in addition to that, they are just designers, you know. I mean James Carpenter is a prime example. Have you ever interviewed him? 
 AVIS BERMAN:  No. 
 JIM SANBORN:  I mean, Carpenter Design Studios in Manhattan—I mean, you know, early on, 10 years ago, he and I competed on separate projects, which he generally won. But he's basically a designer. He's a designer that has a design firm. And basically it seems like, when you go to his website, that they are now primarily designing buildings because they're more lucrative. And they're getting lots of commissions to doing buildings. But he did a lot of public art projects, and he just cleaned up—just cleaned them up one after another. And he's a trained designer—designer/architect. Has a staff of 15 to 20 architects working full time for him. [01:20:00] And he just gets short-listed, you know, on 50 or 100 projects a year. And if they're not making any money on the buildings, they'll just collect a few public art projects. And it's really sad because the guy is not—you know, I've seen his work, and it's just unfortunate that it's—you know, I was on the ATF Panel, and it was miserable. David Levy and I were the two arts people on the panel, and— 
 AVIS BERMAN:  ATF? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Is that Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms. 
 JIM SANBORN:  And firearms. It's in DC. And I exploded at the meeting because the shortlist the GSA brought us was two-thirds—or three-quarters—architects, not artists. And that was a few years ago. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  And did they rethink that? The shortlist? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. They retooled it. And basically, they had an architect win it. And then David Levy and I made such a huge row, they opened the competition up again. Or they actually hired an artist, just a straight artist, whose work that the architect knew. And David and I were left out of the voting. They just went ahead and did it with a different artist. So it was a miserable experience. So now the GSA panels—I have a good friend who's gone through the screening process for the GSA panels, and it's very rigorous. They try to screen out ingrates like myself. 
 AVIS BERMAN: [Laughs] Well— 
 JIM SANBORN:  David. I don't mind because I would rather be an artist being considered than be on a panel. [01:22:00] 
 AVIS BERMAN:  I just realized I should've asked you—just jumping back to Kryptos —once you said that you would be an artist who would consider taking the commission, what kind of security clearance did you have to go through? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Well, it was pretty minor because it was—the whole CIA, when they were building their new headquarters building, it took years to build. And the security level at the agency was dropped tremendously during the whole period because of the volume of contractors they had coming every day, you know. I mean there were people that—there was one time I was in the security office, and I was getting cleared. And this whole biker gang shows up for the roofing company. And they had to turn in—they were, like, turning in knives and blackjacks and brass knuckles and guns and everything. They had this big box full of this stuff that these guys had to turn in to get into the agency, you know. It was like I'm sure they didn't have major, long, security clearances to get in at that point in time. They were somewhat lax. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Yes. Well, it sounds like whoever got the roofing contract probably had an in with someone to get— 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. Hey, listen, I admire anybody who can go on a roof when it's 100 degrees outside, go for it. I don't care if you carry a submachine gun onto the roof. So, I think it was pretty minor. It's nothing like if you were trying to get security clearance today. Or any kind major—where they call your relatives and all that. I don't remember having anybody called. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Maybe short of my parents or something. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Yes. Well, your parents did live to see Kryptos and some of these other things. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes, that's right. They did. That was great. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes, they were very proud of that. It was nice. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  It was a big, big deal. [01:24:00] I think that this is a good stopping point because I think I want to do some of the Los Alamos stuff tomorrow. And then we'll finish and we'll do more of that kind of thing—that theme. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Okay. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  So anyway, thank you very much. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Sure. 
 [END OF AAA_sanbor09_6591_m.] 
 AVIS BERMAN:  This is Avis Berman interviewing Jim Sanborn for the Archives of American Art GSA Oral History Project, on July 16, 2009, in his house in Washington. Now before I get to asking you some emendations on what we discussed yesterday, you happened to mention the Big Dig Project in Boston. And you had something to do with that. And that was probably earlier than where we were. So why don't we start with that. You had mentioned it was an incredible experience, whether positive or negative. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. I mean, I was selected—and I'm not sure what year it was, I mean, the Big Dig. I wasn't supposed to do the project until 2007. And I suppose it was mid-1990s I was selected to do the central portion of the park that was going to be generated by the Big Dig. More or less they were taking down the overhead highway and putting it underground. They were left with a huge sort of central park kind of median down the center of Boston. And so I was selected to do the center portion of that project. And went through several months of model-making, panel meetings, and all of this business. And it was one of the few times in my career where I've turned down a project of significance. 
 I turned that one down after a long deliberation and after a long process going back and forth to Boston many times, because I felt like the project was doomed from the start. And the paperwork required and the fact that the piece wasn't to be installed for 10 years with no increase [00:02:00] in the budget over that length of time. So whatever you proposed then in 1997, you had to build for that price 10 years later. That was something which I felt was a ridiculous concept. And so I walked on the project after working on it for six months. And basically was not paid anything to do what I did prior to that. But I was fine with that. And then I learned years later that the project was dropped after the other artists, who had continued on, labored for years and years and years, had worked on it and then were disappointed in the end. So it was one of the better things I ever did. Also freed me up for other projects. [They laugh.] 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. Who was the patron for that? 
 JIM SANBORN:  It was the City of Boston. It was the Arts Council of Massachusetts—I'm not sure; it might've been the mayor's office that time. I'm not exactly sure how that was done. Yes. And I think Andy Lester was one of the artists, and I believe it was James Carpenter was the other. Three of us involved in that. And then a local artist was also included. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  What were some other negative projects that you remember? 
 JIM SANBORN:  I didn't really do any projects that were difficult. The most difficult projects I do in general—and I've done very few of them—are for corporations. The corporations waded into the public art field because they were given special exceptions and amenities by the counties, cities, municipalities that they're building large projects for. They're building projects for those places, but they have to get zoning permissions. [00:04:00]  So in exchange for putting public art in, they are given increased density and things like that. And that apparently is, I think, a flawed concept because they don't really want the art. They're not that interested in the art. They are required to do the art, and that relationship a very difficult one to maintain for both sides. And so I did have bad experiences in the distant past, in the '80s. I mean, the project was completed on time and all of that. But I was treated like a second-class citizen by the company that regarded artists as being flakes and taking off with the money and not completing it. And so it wasn't until this year where I agreed to do another project—last year I agreed to do another project for a developer. That's yet to be completed, and that's going to be done in 2010. So, so far so good on that project. Had a reasonable experience. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. Are there any projects that you didn't get that you really wish you'd gotten? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Well, I think those are all too numerous to mention. I mean I only get maybe—years ago I'd only get, you know, five percent or 10 percent of the ones I applied for. And so you get to—so you get quickly to a point where you just don't even think about losing projects. It's not, you know—I always wish I had done projects for more inspired architects. But I didn't get the project, those kinds of projects that I wanted to get. But that's, you know, that's the game. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. Also yesterday we, you know, you talked about architects getting public art commissions. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Are there any other—in these last 10 years [00:06:00]—are there any other big problems or negatives that you've seen about the public art scene besides that? 
 JIM SANBORN:  No. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. 
 JIM SANBORN:  No. Well, the only other thing is the application process. And the transition from analog to digital. That process has precluded a lot of artists from commissions. And I think that is very unfortunate as well. To make the transition from the slides, I mean I still have hundreds and hundreds of slides [phone rings] that I can't really use anymore. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Just let me pause this. [Audio break.] 
 JIM SANBORN:  So what was the question? 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Let me see. Oh, this is just—I want to ask you some more about public art when I asked you what it meant to—what makes something a piece of public art. And you talked yesterday about the physical qualities, the presence, the light. I guess I wanted to ask you more about either the psychological or the logistical access—excuse me, aspects. Or about what makes it—is it how much access, how much public? Does the patron make a difference? What is it— 
 JIM SANBORN:  Um— 
 AVIS BERMAN:  —that makes it more than a big outdoor piece for you, I mean, in other words. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Well, I mean, you know, I mean the better public art projects are experiential. I mean, you know, you're confronted by something which is [00:08:00] unfamiliar and at the same time exciting—hopefully—and intellectually stimulating in some way. I mean those components—if those components aren't there, then it's more or less an artist's private statement that you're looking at that was conceived in another location and has to be taken just on the value of its form, removed from the site. Now I think that's unfortunate. I mean, that's where the plop art situation comes in. But I think that, you know, this sense of place, the history of the location, that history could be going back millions of years as far as I'm concerned, and that space has more or less been—that space itself has been passed through over millennia. So that the spaces that these places are, you know, are important in themselves. And so that somehow the artwork should relate to that past. And possibly the future of what's going to happen in that area. But I don't know how to— 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Okay. Because it was just, you know, you had obviously discussed what you had thought made a successful sculpture, but beyond that. 
 JIM SANBORN:  I mean, you know, it's the commissioning agency, the patron who donates the money and the accessibility. I mean, you know, I do a piece that's in a public space in a downtown area where there are lots of people walking around it, it's seen by hundreds of thousands of people. When I do a piece in the courtyard of the CIA, which is completely private, seen by a very small group; but it's been seen by millions of people—at least in image and content and scope. [00:10:00] I mean, you know, it all depends on where you're doing it and what public means. I mean my least public project was my most visible. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. 
 JIM SANBORN:  So I mean, you know— 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. Yes. 
 JIM SANBORN:  But I think that's sort of—you can go to the strength of the object itself. And if the object is evocative or becomes [inaudible] evocative and not when it gets propelled into some other realm, in these days the Internet or whatever, and gets a far larger audience than it would've originally. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. Now yesterday you mentioned that at a certain point there was a 10-year gap between your public art and your private sort of studio/gallery installation work. Has that gap ever been resolved or caught up? And if so, when do you think that happened? 
 JIM SANBORN:  No. If anything, the gap has widened. My public art has diverged further from what I'm doing now in my gallery work. That occurred partly, as I said before, because of physical reasons of not working with heavy objects. I mean I'm somewhat unique in the field in that I do every aspect of my public art. Which means I design it, I make the model or maquette myself, I do the photography of the maquette, I do the presentation myself; I don't have assistants do it. There's nobody else involved in the design process except for my partner, Jae Ko, and she helps me build the models and this kind of thing. And offers, you know, intellectual support as well. And also technical support when I'm dealing with Asian languages. And that's important. [00:12:00] But aside from that, from digging the foundation and digging the hole in the ground, and bending the rebar, and installing the rebar, and pouring the concrete, and all of those things, I do all of those things myself. I don't use contractors. And it's the only way that I've been able to extract a large percentage of the commission price as profit. And I don't also then relinquish—I don't relinquish responsibility for the work to others; and, as a result, take chances with either the piece being injured, damaged, or not built correctly if I'm completely responsible for every aspect of the work. So that's important to me financially and intellectually. It ends up being a very pure process. That's the only way I've survived doing public art, is to buy that and spend, you know, 80 percent or 85 percent which is the usual amount that artists spend paying contractors, and the artist makes 15 percent—I would not be a public artist, or I would not have been a public artist, you know, for 30 years. It would never have happened. I would've had to teach or do something else. That's the only way I've been able to do it. And I don't mind doing it because I, you know, if you calculate the hourly rate that I invest in digging a hole in the ground, I get paid pretty well for digging a hole in the ground. [They laugh.] 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Well, you know—yes. I guess you're paid for your labor on a certain level as well as your vision. 
 JIM SANBORN:  That's right. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  This is a quick question about the IRS, the Martinsburg facility, is that there were two other artists on the project. And I wondered if you consulted or had any interaction with them even though they were in different areas. If you met or had any discussion about larger areas with them. [00:14:00] 
 JIM SANBORN:  Only at the opening. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Okay. 
 JIM SANBORN:  You know, I think by the walk-through in the beginning. We were all invited the same day on the walk-through. This was before the project started, the site visit. That's the only interaction we had. I mean, I am not really a collaborator, and I never have been. I'd rather work entirely on my own. I think there probably is value in collaboration in the art world. Certainly there are some artists and artist teams and whatever that have done very well. I think, you know, collaboration can bring a certain level of heightened expertise to a project because you're diffusing the responsibility amongst a couple of people instead of just one. But I'm hoping that the 30 years of experience that I've had and whatever engineering and technical ability that I had made up for my not drawing someone else into the project. I think that art by consensus is somewhat watered down and can be less effective. And if the artist conceives of an idea, he or she is certainly free to ask an opinion, but they don't necessarily have to follow it. Whereas if it's a true collaboration, then probably all the collaborators are making concessions in some way for, quote, "the greater good." That doesn't necessarily mean it's better art. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Just going to ask you a couple of questions about the Kryptos experience again [00:16:00]: You had said after the time that the CIA rousted you and ABC News from the place, and you weren't allowed to be photographed, you did not come back to the CIA for 16 years. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Right. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Why did you come back after that, after that period? 
 JIM SANBORN:  I was asked to come. I was invited back to review a condition report that they had made on Kryptos . And to check on it to see how it was doing. I mean, certainly other people had gotten into CIA in those intervening years, other Kryptos fanatics. But especially before 9/11 there was a bit more openness on the part of the agency. So they did let some other people in. So I did get at least photographic reports of its condition that were in the media and on certain Internet sites where people were allowed in to photograph sections of it. I wasn't allowed even to look around which I was sort of amazed at. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  And since then you have been—you've gone back since but only to check. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Only that one time. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Oh, okay. Because I thought you had said in the last couple of months ago there was another invitation. 
 JIM SANBORN:  That was it. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  That was it. Okay. Now this is just because it was, to use the word cryptic, on the tape, I mean, you had mentioned off tape—but, you know, I had asked you if you had any regrets or changes about Kryptos , and you said no, you know, if it doesn't kill me. And I wondered if you just wanted to explain that, elaborate on that, for the tape. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Well, it could only be an effect that perhaps people who are in the spotlight [00:18:00] or have high-profile media images have crazies that try to contact them or stalk them or whatever. Or it might be that cryptography brings out the crazies. It's very possible if cryptography itself, the John Nash Syndrome, Beautiful Mind kind of mind is sort of in some ways required for cryptography. And there is a certain level of madness involved in cryptography as there is a certain level of madness involved in making art and doing anything that's highly creative. Moments of, you know—most creative moments can be considered madness on some levels. And if you're going around thinking about something that hasn't been thought about before, you can, on the one hand, think, you know, oh, this is a strange moment. I thought of something that hasn't been done before. You know, I mean just the act of doing that, you can be considered pretty whacko. But the bottom line is that over the years, I've received thousands of—and others—the CIA office, the multitude of Kryptos websites that have received emails. And I get letters routinely on my doorstep that are threatening. And you know, just a few days ago I got an email that was forwarded by somebody who is concerned that there was an individual looking for a closure event regarding me, and he was in Georgetown, and he had a weapon. So that kind of thing is what I'm talking about. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Okay. Well, I just wanted to put that on the tape, you know, that there had been actual death threats as opposed to—you weren't making some overly dramatic—you weren't making a melodramatic statement. [00:20:00] 
 JIM SANBORN:  Right. Yes. No, I wasn't, unfortunately. [They laugh.] 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. Right. Okay. Now I want to switch to the work that began that you're still involved with, which as you said yesterday when you were on a trip to New Mexico, you, quote unquote, "discovered" Los Alamos. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Right. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  And you began working on the idea—the birth of the atomic bomb or the Atomic Age, which occurred, actually the first was the year you were born. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Right. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  And I wondered how you decided you were going to do that because you had sort of said you had had it with secrecy and all that. What changed your mind? Or what made you go back to a certain, you know, that theme? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Well, I mean I had concluded my projection work over a three-year period, and had become—it had become tiresome and physically grueling, doing the projections in the western U.S. and Oregon and Ireland. And so I guess I was looking for something, my next thing. And at White Sands National Monument I did pick up a pamphlet about the Trinity Site. And the Trinity Site was that site 20 miles north—or maybe 30 miles north—of White Sands National Monument. White Sands National Monument is really an outrageously beautiful place. And the fact that this horrendous explosion happened not far from there in a remote, beautiful valley [00:22:00]—although it's called the Valley of Death, I believe, in Spanish—I thought it was ironic and fascinating all at once. And in this pamphlet I picked up, there was an image of some parts of the detection devices for the explosion and a description of the site where the explosion occurred. And these devices were sort of thrown together with cardboard, paper, and looked like duct tape. And I really liked the looseness of the—you know how sort of haphazard yet— 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Deadly? [Laughs.] 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes, it was haphazard and beastly all at once. And so I really liked that idea. And so I read a lot about it. Of course, the seminal book on the subject, Richard Rhodes's* The Making of the Atomic Bomb*. And also Dark Sun were two of the first things that I read. And Rhodes's account was particularly detailed and allowed me to work from his sources. And I had spoken to him and asked him who the best sources of information were on the subject. And dealt with some other people: a fellow named Howard Morland, who had made a model of the hydrogen bomb in the '70s. And had had a magazine article in The Progressive magazine, redacted by the government. And then subsequently un-redacted. So he succeeded in more or less exposing a secret program which I thought was also fascinating. [00:24:00] And so the more I got into it, the more interested I got in the subject. And I finally reached a truck driver in Milwaukee, John Coster-Mullen. And John Coster-Mullen had for the previous 10 years, at least, been studying both the Little Boy and the Fat Man devices and had compiled a tremendous dossier on the exact measurements of those original devices. And the Trinity device was the one that was detonated in the Journada del Muerto Valley—the "journey of death"—valley in New Mexico. I guess it was July 16, 1945 at five a.m. 
 And that same device, Fat Man, was exploded over, I guess it was Nagasaki later. So I chose to work with the Fat Man device because John Coster-Mullen was working on the Little Boy device, which is the other device, and which was exploded over Japan. And so I more or less set about to recreate the original laboratory environment for this project at Los Alamos. So I made several trips to Los Alamos in over about a five-year period of going back and forth a lot. I was able to procure a lot of the original—not a lot of—but a lot of original equipment from the Manhattan Project that had been sitting in physicists' basements for 50 years. Because the laboratory had, in the 1950s, started selling off their scrap materials. 
 In the 1950s they were very liberal [00:26:00] about allowing pieces of the bomb prototypes and things to be sold off as scrap metal. And so the physicists who went to these sales, a lot of these physicists from the 1940s from Los Alamos just chose to remain in Los Alamos and live in the area around Los Alamos. And so these guys were—they were mostly in their 80s when I arrived at the door. I put up notices at retirement homes and coffee shops around Los Alamos, asking if anybody has any pieces of the Manhattan Project, I'd be willing to exhibit them in a museum. 
 The problem was is that museums in general, the Smithsonian included, had exhibited nuclear material previously. Their experience with the Enola Gay was not a positive experience. And so the Enola Gay was removed and not put on display downtown in Washington, but was later displayed at the Udvar-Hazy Center—I think this was Loudon County, Virginia—near Dulles Airport. So our nuclear past, the dropping of the atomic bomb and all of this, was more or less neglected for ethical reasons. But it was still an important part of our history and I thought something that should be revisited. In addition to revisiting that, I felt it was important to revisit what the difference was between pure science and technology. And so that interface between those two things, pure science and technology, is what has occupied my conceptual artistic life for the past 10 years at least. 
 So I set about collecting all of this material [00:28:00] and then recreating from photographs, which would be unavailable today after 9/11, photographs from Los Alamos, that they were released to me, photographs that I found from other sources. The KGB had a lot of—the design of the atomic bomb wasn't, quote, "classified" in the former Soviet Union or actually even in Russia. So you could get bomb dimensions and things. And so I more or less built the first ever highly accurate model of the first atomic bomb for this installation. And worked for about six years on the project. And then finally exhibited the show at the Corcoran Museum. And then it went to the Gwangju Biennale in South Korea, where I took the president of South Korea through the show. And more or less attempted to show it at Nagasaki. But it was still too raw a nerve for them to exhibit. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. 
 JIM SANBORN:  And so that whole secrecy thing became again important to me, albeit it was a very different kind of—it was an institutionalized kind of secrecy. I mean, it's a different thing to keep a code secret than it is to keep a nuclear secret. And the idea behind doing this show, you walk a very fine line between the Right and the Left. The far Left and anti-nuclear movement is intent on exposing our nuclear secrets because Einstein was an example of the thinking. And he felt if there were no secrets, there's no reason for a defense establishment. And if you don't need a defense establishment, and if everybody has the information, then you have a level playing field [00:30:00], and there's no reason to go, you know, committing espionage, having wars, all that other stuff. 
 Well, you know, a lot of that changed in 9/11. And there are hostile countries desperately trying to find these secrets out. But at the time it wasn't that way. And I think the anti-nuclear movement, and John Coster-Mullen and Howard Morland in particular, are still intent on exposing these things because it was of value to do so because it reminds people of what was involved—it reminds people how easy it is to build an atomic device and how easy somebody else other than physicists can build an atomic device. And so that the only way to—the only deterrent for nuclear weapons is to hold them absolutely securely or destroy them. No other option is valid. So destruction or absolute containment is the only way to end nuclear weapons. 
 On the other side, I got a tremendous amount of information from the far Right, the keepers of the weapons themselves. So I had to walk a fine line between those, the liberal and the conservative establishment in doing what I do—as any researcher of any subject needs to do. And it impressed upon me the need. I mean, it sort of impressed upon me the value of the project I did at CIA. The fact that I did the project at CIA, I did Kryptos , certainly assisted me in my Atomic Time endeavor and the current one that I'm working on now. Because I did have a track record on working with a very thorny subject. And was able to utilize information from two diametrically opposed camps. [00:32:00] And that was important to me. So anyway. So I worked on Atomic Time for a very long time. 
 Then that, once I finished Atomic Time , I cast about for the next project and discovered—or actually remembered from Richard Rhodes's book that one of the seminal events in the building of the atomic bomb was the first fissioning of uranium. And incidentally, along the way, Richard Rhodes and I became pretty good friends. And Richard came to Gwangju Biennale. He came to Gwangju and helped work on the Biennale there. Then Richard and I were on a panel together at the Corcoran Gallery for the opening of Atomic Time . And he's also got a new project out of that, he told me, about nuclear things. And he's starting a book tour now this week, I think. 
 Anyway, so I noticed that the Carnegie Institution in Northwest DC, in a quiet residential neighborhood, had a department known as the Department of Terrestrial Magnetism. And they had built a large electrostatic particle accelerator to do nuclear studies of the structure of the atom. And they started building a machine in the 1930s, mid-1930s, not long after Robert Van de Graaff had designed the first one. And that machine was used for nuclear studies for a very short period of time at MIT. But the machine itself was difficult to operate, and it was very large. [00:34:00] So when it was discovered in Europe that uranium had the unique property of, when it was bombarded with neutrons, the nucleus of uranium split, and for every neutron that went into the nucleus, two came out. So you got two for one. You got a free neutron from every atom inside that nucleus. 
 That was a tremendous thing because of the billions and billions of atoms that are inside a tiny piece of uranium. And if each one of those atoms released a free neutron for every one that went in, you all of a sudden had free power. And if you just got enough uranium together—and uranium does give off neutrons itself; so every once in a while these neutrons go out. So if you put enough uranium together in one place, roughly a cubic shape maybe 25 feet by 25 feet by 25 feet, and it's a natural uranium that comes out of the ground, and you put it all together, it will spontaneously fission and create intense heat. And that's what became a nuclear reactor. So the first reactor was built in Chicago by Enrico Fermi. And that was the first nuclear reactor. 
 Well, around the discovery of the fissioning process, the original fission was actually done in a petri dish. It was done with a tiny piece of, I guess, piece of radium and a piece of beryllium metal. And basically, it was done in a small container. So let's just say it was done on a Friday in Europe. [00:36:00] And the news traveled by telegraph around the world. And at the same time, that weekend, on Saturday and Sunday, there was a conference in Washington on nuclear physics, in which Enrico Fermi and Niels Bohr and Edward Teller and the largest names in nuclear physics had attended. It was put on by the Carnegie Institution. And it was a symposium. And all of a sudden this news came through. And one of the papers that was being presented at the symposium discussed the possibility that uranium could be fissioned. 
 And so that day it was realized that that was a possibility, the physicists at the Carnegie Institution that had this machine they'd been building for five years said: Hey, listen. Let's try our machine to see if we can duplicate the process with a particle accelerator. And this machine at the Carnegie, the atom-smashing machine, which they chose to call the atomic observatory—that one there on the wall; they called it an atomic observatory because they didn't want people to know that it was actually splitting atoms and giving off massive amounts of radioactivity. So they called it an observatory like an astronomical observatory. 
 So the atomic observatory actually—they fired up on that Saturday and got a uranium-lined container and were able to fission uranium with the particle accelerator that Saturday. And invited over Enrico Fermi and Edward Teller and Niels Bohr to that basement accelerator room to witness this happen. [00:38:00] The fact that they were getting radiated didn't seem to matter to these physicists. The radiation at the time was fairly significant where they were in particular. But it was relatively harmless because of the amount of time they were in there. 
 So I thought that that was an amazing event. And I went about researching that event and the machine extensively at the Carnegie library where they had the original manuscripts and the physicists' notebooks. And so I took those—I took a camera in and photographed all of those notes and drawings, and then enlarged the drawings full size so that I could reconstruct the machine. And so basically over the last three-year period I've rebuilt that particle accelerator and have installed it on an island that I've had for about five years in the Chesapeake Bay, so that I have enough acres removed from people. And I have a fairly secure environment where people won't accidentally come in contact with my activity. And so I succeeded this past January in fissioning uranium on a very small scale, the scale that they fissioned uranium at the Carnegie using the same machine, basically, of my own building. But it was more or less the same proportions and the same ion gun and the same target material. And they used a cloud chamber to visualize it. 
 So basically, I succeeded January and then have been documenting the event ever since down at the island. At this point, its first venue, which I've just found out about it, if everything goes right, it's going to be the Biennale of the Americas in Denver this coming summer. [00:40:00] So the machine is about 28 feet high and generates about two-and-a-half million volts and fissions uranium. So it's a really gorgeous machine. But again, this was all pure science. And this machine predated the atomic bomb. But the atomic bomb would not have been possible without the results of this machine and fissioning uranium. Fissioning uranium on a large scale is the way you enrich uranium and ultimately, in a nuclear reactor, you can make plutonium. And with particle accelerators you can also make plutonium. And so tiny amounts of these things were the way the scientists at Los Alamos were first able to build the atomic bomb. So that's basically my latest project and will probably carry on for another couple of years hopefully with it being shown in various venues. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. Right. Well, in other words, also, though, scientists, Bohr and Fermi, they saw—in other words they saw it could be done. 
 JIM SANBORN:  That's right. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  So it was the— 
 JIM SANBORN:  It was proof positive that it could be done. And it was proof positive that it could be done with a particle accelerator as well. Which meant if you could do it with a machine, then you could make all of these things. You could make plutonium. You could make uranium. You could make artificial elements. Before that point the elements that were available were all naturally-occurring elements on the earth. By the discovery of the fact that you could bombard an element and make other elements, trans-uranic elements or you could make elements related to uranium but were modified by the bombardment, you could make synthetic elements, most of which were radioactive but were unseen in nature. [00:42:00] 
 And that was important, and, at the same time, absolutely scary because you created—you more or less have created a monster. And that monster could be used for curing cancer, but that monster could also be used for dirty bombs, nuclear weapons, and everything else that's negative about it. So that interface, that moment in time I felt was best visualized by this particle accelerator which was the first, what is called, Big Science Project. Now we have the Large Hadron Collider in Europe, which is a gigantic version of what I built—what was built—and what I recreated—in 1935. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  What did you say that was, the— 
 JIM SANBORN:  The Large Hadron Collider in Europe. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. Okay. How did you get uranium? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Well, you can buy it on the Internet. Yes. I mean, I bought it before 9/11. I think you can probably still buy it as samples. Yes. There's a thing called United Nuclear, and they have a little bit of it. What they are is pieces left over. The U.S. military uses literally tons of what's called depleted uranium or uranium-238. Uranium-238 is used for two things: It's used for many things, but it's the heaviest of substances, uranium is. And so basically the races—what is it called—the sailboat races in the— 
 AVIS BERMAN:  America's Cup. 
 JIM SANBORN:  In the America's Cup, some of them used depleted uranium in the hulls of their—in the large heavy keel of their ships to keep them upright because it's small and dense. [00:44:00] Jet airplanes use uranium as weights on their flaps to keep their flaps down. And it's also used in weapons for destroying tanks because it has the property that if you take a piece of uranium-238 and you hit it really hard against something, it catches fire. It's naturally pyrophoric. So what happens is you shoot a projectile at a tank—you shoot a projectile, a uranium projectile, at an armored tank, and it burns its way through anything. And it burns its way through to the inside of the tank where it sets off all the ordnance inside the tank and blows the tank up from the inside. It also pollutes the entire site and the tank and the land and the humans and anybody hit by it, by a piece of uranium. And that uranium stays with them and stays radioactive for about 1600 years. So all through Iraq, Iran, Vietnam, and everywhere else there are these radioactive sites, thousands of them, on which kids are playing and people are, you know, living with daily from the dispersion of radioactive metal 238. So it was easy to get a little piece. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Before when we were talking, you were mentioning Atomic Time and other we should go back to. And you were saying how, you know, weaving between the Right and the Left. And also things changing since 9/11. How did 9/11 affect your work or your attitudes towards it? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Well, I was here that day, and I was at my coffee shop. [00:46:00] And all of a sudden people started screaming and saying, You have to see this! And they had a television set inside the coffee shop. And we ran inside and watched the World Trade Center planes. And about that same moment we heard an explosion, and we saw a large column of smoke coming up from the south, which was where the plane hit the Pentagon. And I raced over to where I was living at the time, my studio. We didn't know if there were going to be more planes or whatever. But it was the only place that I was living which is in any way secure. So I went over there to listen to the rest of it. Also it was like I had a high vantage point to see what was going on. And so—but from that moment on, and continues today, my sources of information that I had depended on for years were closed off. And I would not have been able to do Atomic Time after 9/11. It would have been a thousand times more difficult—a million times more difficult—because the sources of information were shut off. So I'm glad I did what I did when I did it. I'm glad I worked with the uranium when I worked with it because I couldn't work with it anymore more or less on a large scale. 
 As part of Atomic Time , I had gone around uranium mines in the United States. And I'd also collected uranium from the areas around the world that supplied the uranium for the first atomic bomb. And I took those pieces of uranium and attached them to pieces of four-by-five film and allowed them to irradiate the film to make an image. They're called autoradiographs, where the piece of uranium takes its own photograph. So I was able to get large pieces of uranium and also sort of expose the fact [00:48:00] that the Bureau of Land Management is very lax at controlling access to uranium mines. And that there are thousands of uranium mines all through the western United States, mostly in Utah, which were sort of wide open to the public. And people go in there all the time. And they're highly toxic places to be around. So I just thought that was a fascinating thing. But I was able to use these pieces as part of my exhibition as well. A lot of those sources of supply had been closed off. Although there is now a recent [inaudible] from the Bush Administration which stated that all the uranium mines in the West could be reopened by whoever owned them. And uranium is now being processed in the United States after a long, long hiatus. And so they've more or less opened up Pandora's Box in the United States for uranium exploration and mining and refining. Which is a very sad state of affairs. 
 So that saddened me as a result of 9/11. Also saddened me that the sources of information and the device, the atomic time device that I had built, was more or less a dinosaur of atomic weapons. And so it was an historic object. It wasn't something that would be rebuilt today at all. And even if you had fissionable material, fissionable material like uranium or plutonium, it would be incredibly wasteful. You could build a weapon like this for far less effort, with far less fissionable material. So the fact that the design that I used is still classified, and even more classified now than it was when I did it, is a bit ludicrous. [00:50:00] And so—but the main thing is for researchers now it is much, much harder to talk about our nuclear history than it used to be. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Well, were you investigated after 9/11? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Not that I know of. No. I know that people who I came in contact with were. And the people I got my depleted uranium projectiles from were surrounded on the day of 9/11. The guy who I got these depleted uranium projectiles from, the photograph, his home was surrounded by the ATF and the FBI that day because they knew that he held a large cache of uranium, although without—it was a little like having cannon balls without having any gunpowder. There's nothing you can do with it. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  He had the shells. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes, he had the shells. That's all. So anyway. So that's the way it transpired. So it's made research and made a lot of people's lives much more miserable. I mean, it's made, you know, Iraqi and Americans' lives very difficult. It's made everybody's life more difficult. But I felt as if my new project sort of predated all of that. So a lot of stuff I didn't have to put up with that I had to put up with with Atomic Time . So it seemed an appropriate subject. I don't know whether I'm going to go back further or go further forward from 1935 to 1939 in my next work. But I don't know yet. I haven't gotten that far. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Well. And the Atomic Time—at the Corcoran what kind of reaction did you get there? Because there's certainly all sorts of layers of Washington people who might not necessarily pay attention to conventional art but would— 
 JIM SANBORN:  It was very—it was probably the best received, best reviewed artwork that's been shown in Washington in a long time. [00:52:00] I was very flattered and very fortunate that it was reviewed that way. And in general every review about it, short of the city paper, which has nothing—problem was the city paper reviewer was a former employee of Los Alamos. So he felt that any artist working with scientists was not an artist, was a scientist. So I like pushing the limits of what art is and what science is. And that's just what I do. And so if somebody has a difficulty with that concept, that's their own problem. But in general it was well accepted. It was particularly well accepted by the scientific community. And there are many scientific journals, the journals of the nuclear science industry, were very positive about it. Said it was the most accurate recreation ever done. And I was happy about that because I worked hard to make it accurate. As is the accelerator project. But I'm sure, again, that Kryptos had a lot to do with it. And that the CIA commission went a long way in insulating me from potential problems with what I've been doing for the last years. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  I guess you have street cred on a certain high-flown level. 
 JIM SANBORN:  At a certain level that's true. But I think that really is true of anybody—like Richard Rhodes, I mean, he was the one that impressed this fact upon me more than anyone, and I really respect him—is that he treads that fine line, you know, that razorblade edge between the Right and the Left and conservatives and liberals, and has to try to dance on both sides of the line consistently. [00:54:00] And so it's just part of doing good research. And I'm hoping I did good research. And I'm just presenting the facts. I'm not necessarily making judgments about what it is. I suppose by the fact that I have dredged it up, I could be accused of some sort of nuclear muckraking. But that's fine. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Well, you're not the first. But you are making it three-dimensional. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  And you called it— 
 JIM SANBORN:  I feel as if I'm a three-dimensional—I'm a nonfiction artist. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Yes. [Phone rings.] [Audio break.] I guess you are a nonfiction artist. But on the other hand, these are so elegant-looking. And maybe it's because maybe my little bias toward machine age or streamlined and the '30s, and that's when these were made. I mean, it all looks so elegant. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Well, there are—I mean this is the thing that was very, very important to me. The Atomic Time catalogue is called Atomic Time: Pure Science and Seduction , and for a very good reason. Because I felt as if the experiments themselves were conceptually elegant. And the objects they created were physically elegant and required their hiring artists and jewelers to build them. The tiniest parts of the internal core of the atomic bomb were made by jewelers and hired by the Manhattan Project to do these things because a brute machinist was not able to do the finesse. At the time in the 1940s, machine work was very primitive compared to what it is today. [00:56:00] I had the advantage of being able to use higher technology methods to machine the pieces. So actually, my object was probably more—a more fine, better-looking, well-machined object than the original. But it was still—they were still all very beautiful objects. And in some ways—and sometimes I expanded on them. I mean I would take something like, you know, the piece, the device for determining critical mass, which was actually a fairly small object in a Los Alamos photograph. And I more or less inflated it to a larger object. Because it increased, I felt, the beauty of it. 
 So I was able to take certain aspects of the science and enhance them to make them more beautiful. Just the wires and cables and stuff that's on the floor, I arranged in sort of an Edvard Munch The Scream fashion because it tended to reinforce that kind of terror involved in it. I did include sound in the installation. And it was the sound of Geiger counters actually detecting radiation from uranium—or actually radium—in wristwatch dials. But it was actually real-time sound of radioactivity. And it was a sound that was prevalent and everywhere in these laboratories because it was the only way these people could protect themselves, or knew where not to step, or which path not to take, and how to shield themselves. So they were surrounded by hundreds of Geiger counters. 
 And that was the big deal. There were some lights involved. [00:58:00] But most of it was a sound. It was an aural experience inside these laboratories. The labs were generally fairly dark because they needed a blackout situation. You know, the buildings had very few windows because windows transmitted radiation. So they're mostly in solid cinderblock or concrete buildings. They used the old ice house at Los Alamos, which had very thick, stone walls to assemble the devices. So my re-creation of Atomic Time was more or less what the inside of the ice house looked like. It had no windows. It had drop lights over the displays. No big giant fluorescent lights at all. They didn't exist in laboratories. So they were very dark places that relied on sound for safety. And that's more or less what I tried to create as accurately as possible. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  But I mean the Corcoran really got behind you. This was a terrific catalogue, I mean, too. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  I guess they didn't have—they were able to fundraise or they weren't— 
 JIM SANBORN:  Well, yes, it was not easy though. The subject still was not easy to deal with. They were quite prepared with legal defense in case I was prosecuted because technically what I displayed was classified and still is in the United States. But I wasn't taken to task for it because my sources—there was an article about the guy who—there was an article in the New Yorker a few months ago about Atomic John. That was John Coster-Mullen, who was my major source, that was in *New Yorker *magazine. So John Coster-Mullen has done several things related to this. [01:00:00] But I was the first one to more or less take his measurements and make them three-dimensional. So in a way I more or less proved his theories of the way the things were assembled. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. And did he come and see the show? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes, he came and stayed. And then people that attended— [Ringing sound.] I had Los Alamos scientists. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Oh, do you need to get that? 
 JIM SANBORN:  It's a fax. It's [inaudible]. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  I'm sorry, you had Los Alamos scientists. 
 JIM SANBORN:  I had Los Alamos scientists who came to the show—people who had actually worked on the program and been in that room, and said it was the most chilling experience they'd ever had because it reminded them so strongly of what it was like when they were there. And so it was proven to be accurate. I'm hoping this [19] '35 accelerator will have the same effect. I don't know. It's a different kind of thing. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Well— 
 JIM SANBORN:  I don't know of anybody—nobody is still alive that saw this. The last Carnegie person who was associated with this, and actually who was there, just passed away last year, which is unfortunate because he gave me a lot of the original stuff. And the Carnegie was very great about it. They allowed me—they gave me access to the basement room where Bohr and Fermi and everybody was. And the blackboards were still on the wall with Enrico Fermi's formulas for the event. And, you know, with his scrawlings on there. They're still there. But this is a dank basement underneath the big particle accelerator. And they were storing lawnmowers, contractors' two-by-fours, and then the old science equipment was just moldering away and rusting in dampness and all this stuff. [01:02:00] And so I said, "Listen, I mean, you know, what are you going to do with this stuff?" He said, "Well, I mean we're thinking about clearing it all out and getting rid of it," you know. I said, "Listen. Don't. I mean if you can give me some of these things, at least I can put it into the installation," you know. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm [affirmative]. 
 JIM SANBORN:  So they did. And that was great! But I don't go anywhere like that without my Geiger counter. [They laugh.] So when I walked into this room underneath, my Geiger counter kind of went off the chart. And so I started looking around the room. And on one of the walls there was a little wooden cabinet with two little doors. And I walked up to that and opened up the cabinet, and still in the cabinet from 1935 were the original chemicals—at this point highly unstable, highly radioactive. Pollonium-210 which poisoned our Russian friend. Uranium nitrate, uranium hydride, uranium—all the compounds of uranium were in this cabinet because nobody wanted to get near it. And I don't think anybody ever opened those doors in 20 years, at least, because they didn't want to mess with it. Yet the building was open. So I know that a couple weeks later men in moon suits went in there and removed it all and donated it to that six-foot-thick granite room at the Smithsonian, under the Smithsonian History Building where Marie Curie's radium is. So I at least contributed to the historical preservation of toxic materials. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Yes. And possibly less exposure to other people. 
 JIM SANBORN:  And less exposure to other people, that's right. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  I love this. I never go anywhere without my Geiger counter. [Laughs] 
 JIM SANBORN:  Right. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  No, you're probably more experienced than all the scientists who are there now. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Well, there are none left. The hardest part of doing my project, my current project, was finding a scientist who was familiar with that kind of accelerator. [01:04:00] And I did finally find a guy who was absolutely, completely indispensable to my project, whose name was Steve Brown. And he works at NASA-Goddard Space Flight Center. And I found him through my friend Peter Wasilewski who I'd used for my lodestone project 20 years before. And he operates two or three accelerators. They're modern versions of mine. But they still have some similar principles. He was available to me for two years. And made himself, on his own time, available to help me get this going and made it work. And then another fellow, a scientist named John Singer, of the Jos, J-O-S, Foundation. John Singer was very instrumental in helping me with the electronics involved in making this thing work. And then of course the Carnegie was very supportive. So those three institutions and people were really a big part of what I was able to pull off. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Did the Carnegie give you any funding or did anyone give you any? 
 JIM SANBORN:  No. They just gave me the library, access to the library and support. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Did they realize you were recreating what the— 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes, I told them I was recreating the machine. I'm not convinced I told them I was actually going to do the experiment. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. Well— 
 JIM SANBORN:  Which I did. I mean, fundamentally big science very often requires a gigantic machine to study an absolutely minuscule event on a microscopic level. So that's more or less what I did. I used a huge machine to study a tiny event. [01:06:00] And so by all standards, the amount of radioactivity produced—yes, there was significant radioactivity, but it wasn't of the highly penetrating kind that's going to injure anybody. I mean, nothing close to anything like a dirty bomb or anything like that. But there is a large movement in the United States of people trying to build these things called fusors, which is a type of fusion that people are—lots of amateurs are building. So there are also like amateur science students in high schools building particle accelerators in their bedrooms. I'm, you know, quite appalled at that. 
 And actually, to tell you the truth, seminal experiences of my life were—there were a couple: My dad was in the Navy Reserve before the Library of Congress; I was about 12 years old, interested in science, and I wanted to build a cyclotron in my basement in Alexandria, Virginia. And I started assembling tons and tons of cinderblocks, not knowing a whole lot about it. And I asked him if he could take me to the—it's the Naval Research Lab on the other side of the Potomac River from the Navy Yard in DC along the Anacostia River. And they had a large nuclear water reactor there. And I remember going into the room. I had to wear a badge. I went into the room, and I climbed up on this set of metal stairs which you could see through; climbed down onto this catwalk which was directly over the nuclear reactor. And down there under the water, maybe 50 feet down, was this deep blue glow. 
 I stood there and looked down through my legs and past my feet at this blue glow. And it was just the most amazing thing I'd ever seen. [01:08:00] Then we proceeded to another room on the other side, through another door, to a Van de Graaff generator just very similar to the one that I'd just built out in this field. It's since been destroyed. But it was still being used as a particle accelerator to study atomic physics. So that experience was fascinating, and it was very influential to my doing this project. 
 And I also had another friend who operated a nuclear reactor for the Bureau of Standards in Gaithersburg, Maryland. They had a reactor out there which I visited. Then there was another reactor. Actually, they had a reactor at the University of Maryland Department of Physics. And I did get assistance from one of the scientists at the University of Maryland and took a tour of their facilities for particle accelerating. And so it's been an interesting three-year project. But it's been very hard. I built the machine in probably two years, and it took me an entire year to make it operate. And it was a very frustrating experience day after day after day working with this thing and then finally getting it to work. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  But you must have—I mean, but now it sounds like, you know, you're far enough along that you can see— 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes, it's pretty much over. I mean I'm in a documentation phase, both producing videos and stills and images and installations about what I've worked on for three years. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Mm-hmm, mm-hmm [affirmative]. Now I wanted to ask you that besides Kryptos , what do you consider your most pivotal pieces that you've made? [01:10:00] 
 JIM SANBORN:  Coastline [1993] for the National Oceanic & Atmospheric headquarters, a museum about the ocean, in Silver Spring, Maryland, which was a large wave pool. That was able to recreate the sound and feeling of being at the ocean in a downtown area. And I was very happy about the way that piece turned out. I'm hoping it's still operating the way it was, you know, that I designed it. It takes a good deal of maintenance, something that scale and that technical. But it certainly worked beyond my wildest dreams. Although I made a working model of it, very precise working model of it to be sure it would work. And I worked with a wave engineer, who was one of the [inaudible] wave engineers in the world, on how to design a tempest in a teacup, which is what I did. So it makes it look as if you were dealing with, you know, many feet of water, tons of water, when in fact you're only dealing with about 25 inches of water. And I think that piece and Kryptos . I don't know if there's anything else. 
 I did like the MIT projection on the floor of the Microbiology Department; I was happy about the way that one turned out. And I'm happy about the way the piece works in Fort Myers, Florida, the projection cylinder, and how it illuminates and revitalizes the downtown area of Fort Myers. I felt like I had done some sort of service—or assisted them in trying to make a somewhat bleak, forgotten downtown into something much more dynamic. [01:12:00] 
 And I think some of the other pieces for universities I think are pretty good teaching tools and are instructive. I know my piece down at—I did a piece for the Department of the—what is it?—Energy, Coast and Environment; they all seem a bit working against each other. But it was at Louisiana State University. And I did a piece—I did two projection cylinders and two screens for them that are very effective on a circular building. And that piece was about—because the department is the Department of Energy, Coast and Environment, it was more or less about wetlands, offshore oil rigs, drilling, and the environment. So I chose to do a work that more or less described and listed all the occasions throughout written history of oil spills that occurred naturally, which man had nothing to do with. And this occurred over hundreds of years. And so I got firsthand accounts in Greek and Russian and Arabic and Latin of explorers from Herodotus on through various other people who described massive oil spills. And eruptions of explosive gases from the earth which either injured people or would cure them and were at sacred sites where gas and water exited caves. [01:14:00] So it was sort of about Mother Nature doing this as well. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  And yesterday on the tape you alluded to a book project you were doing. You said you can read certain things in my book. Would you like to summarize that for a few minutes? 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. I mean, I guess what precipitated that—I mean, Kryptos continued to have this fairly active life. And there have been many articles written about it. But the last article in Wired Magazine was written by a writer named Steven Levy. And he's a Manhattan-based writer who is very savvy and a very smart guy. And frankly one of the only writers I know—even including Richard Rhodes—who is capable of describing an extremely technical, difficult subject with a clarity that even I could understand. So he wrote the Kryptos piece, and he's going to be writing a foreword to my book about Kryptos . And that piece apparently stimulated yet again another massive wave of Internet interest in Kryptos . 
 That stimulated a New York literary agent to call me and ask me if I would do a book about Kryptos , which I've agreed to do. It's more or less Kryptos from the source, which is what I was going to call it. And it's my story of how Kryptos was developed and what my inspirations were, what my earlier inspirations were for writing the plain text. And also it's connection with The Da Vinci Code , a sort of grudging connection with The Da Vinci Code book. And the crazy, truly insane response to Kryptos . [01:16:00] And hopefully I'm going to publish many of the wild responses to people who tried to decipher Kryptos but didn't get it—but still their decryptions are interesting reading nonetheless. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Yes. I was really surprised when you had said yesterday that the NSA, that they were all trying to get it. That they were so invested in, you know, decoding this. Whereas you would think, oh, this is a work of art by an artist, and they would've been more relaxed about it. But I guess it isn't in— 
 JIM SANBORN:  Well, you know, the reality is—I mean, cryptography is probably the most closeted of endeavors. It is done in secret. It is done in private. It is just absolutely a private endeavor. It did involve teams of people during the Enigma, you know, the decryption in England. But in general, it's a very private thing. And cryptographers are notoriously private people who don't have exciting lives. Actually, an exciting life is anathema to a cryptographer because they have to keep secrets. Anybody who has to keep a massive amount of secrets doesn't have a lot of friends. They just don't. They don't have social lives. They don't have a lot of stuff. So all of a sudden cryptography became cool. And Kryptos , I think, really helped make cryptography cool. And cryptography became a leisure endeavor, where people—as you were saying earlier, crossword puzzles and this kind of thing. There are puzzles and all that have been around. Code puzzles have not been as obvious as other kinds of puzzles. But now cryptography is cool and trendy. [01:18:00] And there are a lot of people, especially Internet geeks, finally found a home in cryptography. And so it sort of created this worldwide phenomenon that has this life of its own on the Internet, of which I was largely not privy until fairly recently. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. Well, also think of all these people who are writing software. I mean there's a whole industry writing codes. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Writing codes. It's all about writing codes. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  So that's a whole group of the population that never existed before— 
 JIM SANBORN:  That's right. Never existed. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  That would be much more involved with this or would see it as a neighboring activity. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. Absolutely. So in that way it was the right piece at the right time. And maybe it didn't seem like it the first couple of years. But certainly in the 1990s it came to a fore and now is propelled into, you know— 
 AVIS BERMAN:  I just want to make something clear for the tape. You used the term plain text. That means versus encoded text? 
 JIM SANBORN:  That's right. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Because that's—you don't just say text. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Right. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes, but I mean, I had to compose several paragraphs, which they are called K1, K2, K3, and K4. That text written in English by me and also Howard Carter are the elements that are—K1, 2, 3 have already been deciphered. K4 has not been deciphered. It's the plain text that I have copyright on. And the encoding system isn't copyrightable. But it doesn't matter because frankly, you know—anyway, since I have copyright on the plain text, then there is some proprietary owning of the text, which thank God, some part of it I can own and am able to control [01:20:00], so other interpreters don't try to imply that my artwork means something that it does not. And that is a challenge. There are people who decipher Kryptos and say—they call up the New York Times or the Washington Post or a major network and say: This is the decryption of Kryptos . I don't care what Sanborn says. He's just lying. This is actually the real thing. And sometimes they come at it with lawyers. They bring lawyers with them. They bring all this stuff. They don't want to divulge it. They only want to divulge it on air. Okay? And it's created a big problem for networks and newspapers in order to separate the wheat from the chaff. 
 So anyway that will go on hopefully for a century, long after my death. And, you know, I have made provisions for if somebody does decode it after I'm gone, there are provisions in place for acknowledging that. But, you know, you can acknowledge that, and then 50 years later it'll be forgotten and hopefully be dredged up again. And somebody else will be interested in it. So that's all. And the plain text itself is cryptic and alludes to things beyond Kryptos . And that's also part of it. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. Kind of like the Oracle— 
 JIM SANBORN:  Yes. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  —of Delphi. 
 JIM SANBORN:  Or anything else. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Yes. Mm-hmm [affirmative]. Anything else you'd like to add? 
 JIM SANBORN:  I don't think so. I think we've got it. 
 AVIS BERMAN:  Right. I think we're pretty much done then. Thank you very much. 
 JIM SANBORN:  You're welcome. 
 [END OF AAA_sanbor09_6592_m.] 
 [END OF INTERVIEW.] 
 
 2009-10-16 - Dinner 
 Randy Thompson’s Notes from Sanborn/Scheidt Dinner 
 Date: Friday, October 16, 2009 Time: 7:30 p.m. onward Location: Pulcinella Restaurant, McLean, Virginia 
 Attendees: Jim “FitnezzJim” A. Timothy Ball Richard Belfield Donna “Piranha” Byczkiewicz Elonka Dunin Jew-Lee Irena Lann (+ guest) Balena D. Lloyd Dan McArdle Katherine Miller (+ 2 guests) Tim Rainey Jae Sanborn Jim Sanborn Ed Scheidt Randy Thompson (+ guest) John Wilson 
 Our group was seated in a downstairs room at a long table (really several tables placed end-to-end). I was seated at the opposite end of the table from Sanborn. Scheidt was seated on one side, about 7 people down from me, closer to Sanborn than to me. When dinner was finished and dessert was being served, Sanborn kindly moved down to my end of the table to engage with the folks that hadn’t had the chance to interact with him due to the original seating arrangements. 
 I had a request and a question for Sanborn: 
 a) We’re in need of more teamwork. We’ve tried it in various forms, but it doesn’t seem to be working. I asked him if he would make a statement encouraging us to use teamwork, and he said that yes, he would. He mentioned that he is currently working on a book, which will include encouragement and hints. He didn’t indicate how far along he is on the book, but said something to the effect of “ if it’s published.” 
 b) I told him that I had a process toward a solution that ended with a string of 48 characters. I asked him if it was possible that the K-4 solution process could go down that low and then be expanded back to about 100 characters. He answered that “anything’s possible.” 
 For about an hour after dinner, the attendees mingled in small groups. At one point, I was alone with Scheidt. I spoke with him about my process. I thought he might be more open to discussion of it than Sanborn would be. As I gave an overview of my theory, he listened, smiled, and nodded respectfully, but didn’t give any indication of endorsement, surprise, or discouragement. At the end of our conversation, he shook my hand and said, “Good luck”, again without conveying any tone that indicated “you’re going to need it” or, conversely, “I’m excited for you”. 
 I noticed that Sanborn and Scheidt didn’t spend much time together. This could have been because they wanted to spread out and mingle as much as possible, or there could be some tension between the two of them regarding which had actually designed the Kryptos code (an observation by Elonka that she shared with me at the Symposium prior to the dinner). Speculation: The tension, if it exists, may be the result of previous comments the two have made about each other or may be the result of a disagreement over some aspect of the handling of Kryptos. 
 I mentioned to Sanborn that it’s difficult for us to follow all of the work being done in the group and by individuals, so that it was probably unlikely that he could follow all of it either. He responded that he doesn’t follow it himself, but that Elonka is his “filter” or “supplier” for information about what’s being done. 
 I asked Sanborn if anyone had either found the clue that they had claimed was being missed or whether anyone had yet successfully provided a K1-K3 decryption technique that followed the path they had originally intended. Jim responded that that was possible but that he hadn’t been following the progress. 
 Donna told me that she may have gotten a small hint from Jae Sanborn. When asked about the “K-4 Test,” she casually described the way a prospective solver would be asked to verify several letters in certain positions. In an example, she rattled off several numbers, including 98 and 99. After saying those two numbers, she quickly added, “or however many there are.” This would seem to confirm what we’re already pretty sure about: that there are about that many letters in the solution. However, if she hasn’t actually seen the solution or hasn’t used/rehearsed/read the K-4 Test, then her numbers may have been only examples off the top of her head, without basis in anything she’s seen of the actual test or text. 
 Although they didn’t always answer questions, I didn’t get the feeling that Scheidt or either of the Sanborns said anything to trick us. 
 Scheidt mostly listened and did little talking. 
 Jae Sanborn didn’t seem to be there as a Kryptos authority for answering questions. 
 When the dinner activities wound down, I returned to my hotel. It’s my understanding that some or all of the others might have continued the evening elsewhere. 
 On Saturday, I returned home, while Elonka and some others visited Sanborn’s studio and other sites in the DC area. 
 
 2009-11-01 - Discovery Channel 
 11/1/2009 Hunting The Lost Symbol Discovery Channel # URL: http://www.thekryptosproject.com/media/video/ # N - Narrator # JS – James Sanborn # Transcribed by: Jew-Lee Irena Lann # 
 N: Another group, whose very existence depends upon codes and ciphers, is the Central Intelligence Agency. The book claimed this artwork exists on CIA grounds, and that it is yet to be fully deciphered by an army of code breakers. Does such a thing exist? And who could have stumped the spymasters? 
 Kryptos, which is a Greek word meaning hidden, was the brainchild of artist, James Sanborn. In a rare television interview, Sanborn discusses his very real creation. 
 JS: It seemed to me, that the best/first way to design an artwork for like a spy agency, that would slowly unravel itself and maintain a level of interest. 
 N: In 1991, Sanborn unveiled Kryptos, before a skeptical audience of spymasters. What they saw, was a large sculpture featuring an S-shaped copper scroll, emerging what appears to be a computer printer. Covering the scroll, is a complex encrypted text, comprising nearly 1800 figures, divided into four sections. 
 JS: I had studied archeology for years and was fascinated by things hidden underground. And…were laborious to uncover, but were fascinating when they were found. And so… that whole process was the way I wanted Kryptos, the sculpture, to unfold. 
 
 N: Kryptos contains a riddle within a riddle, which will be solvable only after the four encrypted passages have been decrypted. So far, only three have been answered correctly. 
 JS: I assumed that those first segments would be cracked in a matter of days, at the most weeks. 
 N: In fact, it took nine years. 
 JS: When I was at the Agency, I was talking to other contractors. And he said, “Do you know that they come through here with neutron ground penetration radar, after everything is done. And this heavy-duty radioactive equipment to try to look in the ground, all around these areas.” 
 N: Whether the clue refers to something bury in the ground, nobody really knows and Sanborn isn’t saying anything. 
 2010-11-17 - Wired 
 Kryptos Artist to Reveal Rare Clue to Baffling CIA Sculpture 
 Kryptos sleuths may finally get some help cracking the CIA sculpture that has confounded amateur and professional cryptographers for two decades. 
 Artist Jim Sanborn, who created the cipher sculpture in 1990 for CIA headquarters in Langley, Virginia, plans to release a new clue to help puzzle detectives solve the last 97 characters of his masterpiece. The new clue is to be revealed in a New York Times article this weekend, to mark the 20th anniversary of the sculpture, which was dedicated Nov. 3, 1990. 
 It will be the first clue Sanborn has revealed in four years, after he corrected a typo in his sculpture in 2006 to keep crypto detectives from being derailed in their search for solutions. 
 Sanborn wouldn't disclose the clue to Threat Level but said only cryptically that it will " globalize " the sculpture. Asked if this meant it would take the sculpture off the CIA grounds and out of the United States, he conceded it would. 
 "I personally think it's a significant clue," he said. "I'm throwing it out there. It just makes that many fewer characters people have to figure out." 
 Sanborn said he'd been thinking about revealing a clue for a long time but couldn't decide on the right occasion until the 20th anniversary and his birthday coincided in the same month. 
 "I don't have that many decades ... left in me," the 65-year-old artist said. 
 The 12-foot-high, verdigrised copper, granite and wood sculpture is inscribed with four encrypted messages, three of which have been solved. The sculpture's theme is intelligence gathering (Kryptos is Greek for "hidden"). 
 It features a large block of petrified wood standing upright, with a tall copper plate scrolling out of the wood like a sheet of paper. At the sculpture's base is a round pool with fountain pump that sends water in a circular motion around the pool. Carved out of the copper plate are approximately 1,800 letters, some of them forming a table based on an encryption method developed in the 16th century by a Frenchman named Blaise de Vigenere. 
 Sanborn sells replicas of the sculpture for $150 at the International Spy Museum in Washington, D.C., and other locations (see photo below of prototype taken at Sanborn's home in 2006). 
 In 1998, CIA analyst David Stein cracked three of the four messages using paper and pencil and about 400 lunch-time hours. Only his CIA colleagues knew of his success, however, because the agency didn't publicize it. A year later, California computer scientist Jim Gillogly gained public notoriety when he cracked the same three messages using a Pentium II. 
 The first section is a poetic phrase that Sanborn composed. The second hints at something buried: "Does Langley know about this? They should: It's buried out there somewhere." The third section comes from archaeologist Howard Carter's diary describing the opening of a door in King Tut's tomb on Nov. 26, 1922. 
 But for 20 years, the fourth section of the puzzle, consisting of 97 characters, has remained unsolved. The clue Sanborn spills this week may help untangle the message, but won't necessarily solve the puzzle. 
 "It doesn't mean you're going to understand it or it will be completely laid out before you," he said. "It will not be plain as day, ever." 
 This is because the text hides a riddle, which Sanborn has said requires sleuths to be on the CIA grounds to solve it. 
 "In part of the code that's been deciphered, I refer to an act that took place when I was at the agency and a location that's on the ground of the agency," Sanborn said during a 2005 interview with Wired.com. "So in order to find that place, you have to decipher the piece and then go to the agency and find that place." 
 The riddle may refer to something Sanborn buried on the CIA grounds at the time he installed the sculpture. Decrypted parts of the sculpture give latitude and longitude coordinates (38 57 6.5 N, 77 8 44 W), which Sanborn has said refer to "locations of the agency." 
 Only two other people were said to know the solution to Kryptos. CIA cryptographer Ed Scheidt helped Sanborn choose and alter the coding techniques for the sculpture. And former CIA director William Webster received a sealed envelope containing the solution at the sculpture's dedication. In 2005, Sanborn revealed to Wired.com that a decrypted line in the sculpture referred to Webster: "Who knows the exact location? Only WW." But Sanborn also said at the time that Scheidt, now a retired chairman of the CIA's Cryptographic Center, and Webster only thought they knew the solution. 
 " Well, you know, I wasn't completely truthful with [Webster]," Sanborn said. "And I'm sure he realizes that. I mean that's part of trade craft, isn't it? Deception is everywhere.... I definitely didn't give him the last section, which has never been deciphered." 
 The encrypted sections include intentional spelling errors and misaligned characters set higher on a line of text than characters around them. But in 2006, Sanborn realized the sculpture contained an inadvertent error, a missing "x" that he mistakenly deleted from the end of a line in section two, a section that was already solved. He discovered the omission while doing a letter-by-letter comparison of the plain text and coded text in preparation for a book about the life of the sculpture. 
 The "x" was supposed to signify a period or section-break at the end of a phrase. Sanborn removed it for aesthetic reasons, thinking it wouldn't affect the way the puzzle was deciphered. In fact it did. What sleuths had until then deciphered to say "ID by rows" was actually supposed to say "layer two." The correction hasn't helped anyone solve the rest of the puzzle, however, in the subsequent four years. 
 In conjunction with the new clue release, Sanborn is launching a website for the sculpture to provide an automated way for people to contact him with their proposed solutions to the puzzle. Over the years, numerous people who were convinced that they'd solved the final puzzle section have contacted him. One woman even showed up at his secluded home on an island. 
 Most of the solutions people have offered have been wildly off-base. Sanborn says that with the launch of his new site, anyone who thinks they've solved the last section will have to submit what they believe are the first 10 characters of the final 97 before he will respond. 
 Sanborn has produced a number of other cipher sculptures, in addition to Kryptos. But his most recent work has focused on recreating the 1939 experiment at the Carnegie Institution of Washington that resulted in the first fission of uranium using a particle accelerator. His working accelerator can be seen at the Museum of Contemporary Art in Denver, Colorado. 
 
 2010-11-19 - Wired 
 Kryptos Artist Launches Website to Receive Solutions 
 Start your engines, Kryptos fans. Artist Jim Sanborn, the creator of the CIA’s Kryptos sculpture, has launched his new website which he built in conjunction with a much-anticipated clue he’s scheduled to release in a New York Times story this weekend. The site Kryptos Clue appeared this week. It’s meant to provide an automated way […] 
 Start your engines, Kryptos fans. Artist Jim Sanborn, the creator of the CIA's Kryptos sculpture, has launched his new website which he built in conjunction with a much-anticipated clue he's scheduled to release in a New York Times story this weekend. 
 The site Kryptos Clue appeared this week. It's meant to provide an automated way for people to contact Sanborn with their proposed solutions to the puzzle. The site consists of a single page with an online form for solvers to submit the first 10 characters of their proposed solution to the puzzle. 
 Sanborn created the cipher sculpture in 1990 for CIA headquarters in Langley, Virginia, and plans to release a new clue to help puzzle detectives solve the last 97 characters of his masterpiece. The new clue is to be revealed to mark the 20th anniversary of the sculpture, which was dedicated Nov. 3, 1990. 
 It will be the first clue Sanborn has revealed in four years, after he corrected a typo in his sculpture in 2006 to keep crypto detectives from being derailed in their search for solutions. 
 Sanborn wouldn’t disclose the clue to Threat Level but said only cryptically that it will "globalize" the sculpture. Asked if this meant it would take the sculpture off the CIA grounds and out of the United States, he conceded it would. 
 "I personally think it's a significant clue," he said. "I'm throwing it out there. It just makes that many fewer characters people have to figure out." 
 The 12-foot-high, verdigrised copper, granite and wood sculpture is inscribed with four encrypted messages, three of which have been solved. The sculpture’s theme is intelligence-gathering (Kryptos is Greek for "hidden"). Three of the four have already been cracked, but the last one -- consisting of just 97 characters -- has confounded amateur and professional cryptographers for 20 years. 
 Sanborn has been contacted over the years by numerous people who believed they'd solved the puzzle. Many of the solutions they proposed were wildly off-base. He told Threat Level that with the launch of his new site, anyone who thinks they’ve solved the last section will have to submit what they believe are the first 10 characters of the final 97 before he will respond. 
 
 2010-11-20 - NYT - BERLIN 
 Clues to Stubborn Secret in C.I.A.’s Backyard 
 By JOHN SCHWARTZ 
 Published: November 20, 2010 
 Jim Sanborn, the creator of the “Kryptos” sculpture at C.I.A. headquarters, at an astronomical radio observatory in New Mexico. 
 “ Kryptos ,” the sculpture nestled in a courtyard of the agency’s Virginia headquarters since 1990, is a work of art with a secret code embedded in the letters that are punched into its four panels of curving copper. 
 “Our work is about discovery — discovering secrets,” said Toni Hiley, director of the C.I.A. Museum. “And this sculpture is full of them, and it still hasn’t given up the last of its secrets.” 
 Not for lack of trying. For many thousands of would-be code crackers worldwide, “Kryptos” has become an object of obsession. Dan Brown has even referred to it in his novels. 
 The code breakers have had some success. Three of the puzzles, 768 characters long, were solved by 1999, revealing passages — one lyrical, one obscure and one taken from history. But the fourth message of “Kryptos” — the name, in Greek, means “hidden” — has resisted the best efforts of brains and computers. 
 And Jim Sanborn , the sculptor who created “Kryptos” and its puzzles, is getting a bit frustrated by the wait. “ I assumed the code would be cracked in a fairly short time, ” he said, adding that the intrusions on his life from people who think they have solved his fourth puzzle are more than he expected. 
 So now, after 20 years, Mr. Sanborn is nudging the process along. He has provided The New York Times with the answers to six letters in the sculpture’s final passage. The characters that are the 64th through 69th in the final series on the sculpture read NYPVTT. When deciphered, they read BERLIN. 
 But there are many steps to cracking the code, and the other 91 characters and their proper order are yet to be determined. 
 “Having some letters where we know what they are supposed to be could be extremely valuable,” said Elonka Dunin, a computer game designer who runs the most popular “Kryptos” Web page . 
 None of this was really envisioned when the Central Intelligence Agency planned the expansion known as the New Headquarters Building in the 1980s and asked artists to submit proposals to create a work of art for the courtyard. The broad principles it provided for the $250,000 commission included the notion that it should “engender feelings of well-being, hope.” 
 The winner was Mr. Sanborn, and the agency introduced him to Edward Scheidt, a retiring C.I.A. cryptographer, who gave him a crash course in the arts of concealing text and helped devise the codes used in the sculpture. 
 One reason the fourth puzzle has proved so difficult is because, with just 97 characters, it is shorter than any but the first. Longer chunks of text are easier to crack because there is more information to study for patterns. 
 The messages form the two left-hand panels of the sculpture’s wall of text; the other two panels on the right side provide the key to cracking some of the text. Each is encrypted in a different way from the others. 
 The first reads: “Between subtle shading and the absence of light lies the nuance of iqlusion.” (Mr. Sanborn admitted to introducing misspellings to add a degree of difficulty.) 
 The second passage includes the latitude and longitude of the C.I.A.’s headquarters and asks, “Does Langley know about this? They should: it’s buried out there somewhere. X Who knows the exact location? Only WW.” 
 This is a reference to William Webster , the former C.I.A. chief — Mr. Sanborn gave him a key to deciphering the messages. 
 The third passage paraphrases, with an intentional misspelling, the account of Howard Carter, the renowned Egyptologist, as he opened King Tut ’s tomb. Mr. Sanborn has said the passage has inspired him since childhood. 
 “Slowly, desparatly slowly, the remains of passage debris that encumbered the lower part of the doorway was removed. With trembling hands I made a tiny breach in the upper left-hand corner. And then, widening the hole a little, I inserted the candle and peered in. The hot air escaping from the chamber caused the flame to flicker, but presently details of the room within emerged from the mist. x Can you see anything? q” 
 Though “Kryptos” has long been famous in code-busting circles, it gained wider notoriety when Mr. Brown slyly referred to it on the dust jacket of his best-selling novel “The DaVinci Code” and incorporated it into the plot of “The Lost Symbol.” 
 ALSO released were the charts for K1 & K2 
 K1 - New York Times 2010 
 K2 - New York Times 2010 
 
 2010-11-21 - Wired 
 'Berlin' Is Revealed as Kryptos Clue 
 “Berlin” is the highly anticipated clue from artist Jim Sanborn that’s meant to help crypto sleuths unlock the cipher to his enigmatic Kryptos sculpture. The clue was revealed Saturday in a New York Times article. Sanborn gave the newspaper six letters from the remaining 97 letters that have yet to be solved in the sculpture’s […] 
 "Berlin" is the highly anticipated clue from artist Jim Sanborn that's meant to help crypto sleuths unlock the cipher to his enigmatic Kryptos sculpture. The clue was revealed Saturday in a New York Times article. 
 Sanborn gave the newspaper six letters from the remaining 97 letters that have yet to be solved in the sculpture's final passage. The six letters -- NYPVTT -- are the 64th through 69th letters of the final 97 characters. When deciphered, they read "BERLIN." 
 It's the first clue Sanborn has revealed in four years, after he corrected a typo in his sculpture in 2006 to keep crypto detectives from being derailed in their search for solutions. 
 Sanborn told Threat Level last week that he wanted to reveal a clue to mark the 20th anniversary of the sculpture's dedication at CIA headquarters in 1990. He said it would be a " significant clue" and hinted that it would "globalize" the sculpture. Asked if this meant it would take the sculpture off CIA grounds and out of the United States, he conceded it would. 
 Code detectives were already at work trying to crack the rest of the solution Saturday afternoon following the new clue revelation. Members of a popular Kryptos Yahoo Group were brainstorming during a 90-minute conference call. 
 "The 'Berlin' clue makes a lot of sense, in historical context of the Berlin Wall coming down that year," says code cracker Elonka Dunin, a game designer who moderates the Yahoo Group and maintains a comprehensive website on Kryptos. 
 The Berlin Wall came tumbling down in Nov. 1989, almost exactly a year before the dedication of the Kryptos sculpture at CIA headquarters, and would have been on Sanborn's mind. Dunin also points out that three slabs of the Berlin Wall sit at CIA headquarters, a gift from the German government. Although the slabs weren't dedicated as a monument until 1992, two years after Kryptos, Dunin thinks it's possible the CIA had already chosen a spot for them when Sanborn was designing Kryptos and told him about it. 
 Kryptos is a 12-foot-high, verdigrised copper, granite and wood sculpture inscribed with four encrypted messages. The sculpture's theme is intelligence gathering (Kryptos is Greek for "hidden"). 
 It features a large block of petrified wood standing upright, with a tall copper plate scrolling out of the wood like a sheet of paper. At the sculpture's base is a round pool with fountain pump that sends water in a circular motion around the pool. Carved out of the copper plate are approximately 1,800 letters, some of them forming a table based on an encryption method developed in the 16th century by a Frenchman named Blaise de Vigenere. 
 Three of the four sections have already been solved. But the fourth -- containing the 97 characters -- has confounded crypto detectives for 20 years. 
 The first message, containing a deliberate misspelling, is a poetic phrase that Sanborn composed: 
 "Between subtle shading and the absence of light lies the nuance of iqlusion." 
 The second one, also with a misspelling, decrypts to: 
 "It was totally invisible. How's that possible? They used the earth's magnetic field. x The information was gathered and transmitted undergruund to an unknown location. x Does Langley know about this? They should: it's buried out there somewhere. x Who knows the exact location? Only WW. This was his last message. x Thirty eight degrees fifty seven minutes six point five seconds north, seventy seven degrees eight minutes forty four seconds west. Layer two." 
 W.W. refers to William Webster, the former director of the CIA. 
 The third message, with another misspelling, is a take on a passage from the diary of English Egyptologist Howard Carter describing the opening of King Tut’s tomb in Nov. 1922. 
 "Slowly, desparatly slowly, the remains of passage debris that encumbered the lower part of the doorway was removed. With trembling hands I made a tiny breach in the upper left-hand corner. And then, widening the hole a little, I inserted the candle and peered in. The hot air escaping from the chamber caused the flame to flicker, but presently details of the room within emerged from the mist. x Can you see anything? q" 
 Sanborn has said in the past that the previous three sections contain clues to solving the final section. The additional clue he spilled this week may help untangle that final section, but even if sleuths decipher the final code, there's an additional message hidden in the sculpture in the form of a riddle. Sanborn has said sleuths would need to be on the CIA grounds to solve it. 
 "In part of the code that's been deciphered, I refer to an act that took place when I was at the agency and a location that's on the ground of the agency ," Sanborn said during a 2005 interview with Wired.com. " So in order to find that place, you have to decipher the piece and then go to the agency and find that place ." 
 The riddle may refer to something Sanborn buried on the CIA grounds at the time he installed the sculpture. Or, Dunin suggests, it may refer to the location of the Berlin Wall monument on the CIA grounds. In section two of Kryptos, which has already been decoded, there are longitude and latitude coordinates mentioned -- 38 57 6.5 N, 77 8 44 W. Sanborn has said they refer to "locations of the agency." Dunin notes that the latitude and longitude of the Berlin Wall monument's location -- 38 57 2.5 N, 77 8 40 W -- differ from the coordinates mentioned in the Kryptos passage by just four seconds in both the latitude and longitude. 
 She speculates that the CIA might have originally planned to position the Berlin Wall monument at the coordinates Sanborn mentions on Kryptos, or Sanborn may have been using an incorrect U.S. geological map when he created his sculpture and thus got the coordinates wrong. 
 It wouldn't be the first inadvertent error on Kryptos. In 2006, Sanborn realized the sculpture contained an unintentional error, a missing x that he mistakenly deleted from the end of a line in section two, a section that was already solved. 
 The x was supposed to signify a period or section-break at the end of a phrase. Sanborn removed it for aesthetic reasons, thinking it wouldn't affect the way the puzzle was deciphered. In fact it did. What sleuths had until then deciphered to say "ID by rows" was actually supposed to say "layer two." The correction hasn't helped anyone solve the rest of the puzzle, however, in the subsequent four years. 
 In conjunction with the new clue release, Sanborn has launched a website, Kryptos Clue, to provide an automated way for people to contact him with their proposed solutions to the puzzle. Over the years, numerous people who were convinced that they'd solved the final puzzle section have contacted him. One woman even showed up at his secluded home on an island. 
 Most of the solutions people have offered have been wildly off-base. Sanborn says that with the launch of his new site, anyone who thinks they've solved the last section will have to submit what they believe are the first 10 characters of the final 97 before he will respond. 
 
 2010-11-23 - CBC Radio 
 11/23/11 && 2/18/12 Q, the podcast-CBC Radio One:Interview of Release of “BERLIN” clue. URL: http://podcast.cbc.ca/mp3/podcasts/qpodcast_20101123_41607.mp3 Interviewer: ?? JS: Jim Sanborn ############################################### 
 Interviewer: Well, if you've ever been to the CIA Headquarters in Langley, Virginia, you may have noticed one of its best kept secrets, an encryption sculpture, that stands in the courtyard. The 12-ft high sculpture called Kryptos, contains secret codes hidden in the letters, carved out of its 4 panels of curved copper. And since the work of art was erected in 1990, cryptographers have been obsessed with trying to decipher the messages. Now the first 3 panels were solved by 1999, but the final panel, has remained a complete mystery. Now after 20 year it's creator, Jim Sanborn, has final revealed a clue, but will it be enough to help crack the code? Sculpture and cryptographer Jim Sanborn joins me by phone from Washington D.C. this morning. Hello sir. 
 JS: Hi. How are you? 
 Interviewer: [Laughing] I am very well...this is a very fascinating tale you have to tell. So you finally revealed a clue to Kryptos in Sunday's New York Times. You decoded characters 64 through 69 of the final panel. Uh .. For those who haven't read the article yet. What was the clue? 
 JS: I divulged the word...or... place, berlin, B-E-R-L-I-N. 
 Interviewer: And why did you decide to reveal the clue now? 
 JS: Well, this is the month that ..uh..Kryptos was dedicated 20 years ago. It was dedicated on the 5th of November, 20 years ago. and ..ah...it’s also my birthday month. And ...um...there are several other reasons as well. I've been dealing with people calling me, sending emails, appearing on my doorstep, and a whole variety [Interviewer laughs] of things..um..coming to bring their decode of the final panel of Kryptos, the 97 characters, infamously known as K4, for 20 years now and so...I also wanted to try to streamline the system and to make it easier on myself, for telling someone whether they'd cracked the code or not.. 
 Interviewer: Well, so...[Stammering]..One of the reasons, if.. ah..I am reading between the lines of what you just said, that you are exhausted by people not decoding your... [Interviewer laughs] ...your puzzle, right? [Stammering]..Ar-Are you surprised no one had cracked the entire puzzle-b-puzzle by now? it's been 20 years, right? 
 JS: Yeah, I am surprised. I mean I had h--I had hoped the final K4 section would last for a very long time. And I designed it in such a way that, you know, that.I-I figured it might. Um...The other sections, which were decoded, still took, you know, several years, I mean almost 8 years to decode. I thought it would take a matter of days or weeks, but it took a very long time to even decode the simplest sections. So, Yes! I've been pleasantly surprised, but as far as I am concerned, if you’re an artist, and your-your building an artwork..um...I think if you don't build an artwork that has a lot of content or something that remains in person- in a person's mind, or sticks with them, I don't personally find any reason to make it. 
 Interviewer: So-so Jim ah..ah...this is a very famous piece you've created, but there are people probably listening and have no idea what we are talking about.so take me back...you erected Kryptos, which means hidden in Greek. outside the CIA Headquarters in 1990. What was the purpose of this piece, in the first place? 
 JS: Yeah, I-I mean I entered a competition, and pre-prior to this-and prior to this body of work, or prior to Kryptos, I had been working with the invisible forces of the Earth. Like the magnetic force of the Earth...uh...Coriolis force and various other invisible forces. So the panelist, I think, made a conceptual leap and decided that I was um…qualified to do something with the invisible forces of mankind i.e. something on the Agency’s grounds. So I did choose to do a coded piece for the Agency...uh...something to stump the agency and also something to peak the interests of …ah…viewers. 
 Interviewer: Sheesh and I know you spent four months devising these codes with...ah…the help of a retired CIA cryptographer. I-y-y-you talk about the response you had, especially lately, and over the last few years people...ah...harassing... [Interviewer laughs]... you to a certain extent. Ah…Asking whether they've actually decoded it or not. I mean over the years many have attempted to solve the panel's codes...some having success with the first three by 1999, as we said, including one CIA physicist, who solved them with only a pen and paper, apparently, on his lunch breaks. What kind of responses have you had from Kryptos code breakers and fans in general? 
 JS: W-W-Well, it's extremely varied. I mean for example, it crosses all sorts of social-economic barriers. It crosses all barriers of race and culture and it's become something of a global phenomenon. And-For example there are apparently...um...persons who have become...uh...disabled...ah...by brain injury and things like this. Krytpos is offered up as a way to recreate the brain. 
 Interviewer: Hmm.. 
 JS: and so it is used apparently in many sites in order to...ah... to heal people. And I thought that was a wonderful... [SB laughs]...use of Kryptos.. [Interviewer laughs].and at the same time- I am not sure if you are familiar with the ne-movie "The Beautiful Mind" or the book. 
 Interviewer: Sure. 
 JS: but there is a [Break] -Cryptography, is not dissimilar from the arts. In that the..um..th-the mental state of the ..ah..artist or the cryptographer,..um..is receptive to inspiration during stressful periods and so it's a very much of a savant kind of endeavor. And I'm not really ever- and I d-don't have any of those qualities I mean I can't do any math at all I can't do an algorithm. I can't do anything, but the people who are truly skilled in these areas, are able to do it, but it also--it tends to appeal to a fringe group that are very intense. And so these people get involved, extremely involved, in decoding these things. Th-There are lives that have been wrecked, there are businesses that have gone bankrupt, there are people who have gone on pilgrimages to Kryptos' sites, you know, around the world. Um... things like this and so the audience has just mushroomed..um.. over the decades and I have been very surprised at that response. 
 Interviewer: And a-And a woman has shown up at your door? Convinced you're-- 
 JS: Yeah I mean, people show up at my door step.. [Interviewer laughs]...um..thinking that they had to be there that day to confront me and tell me what they said the code was. 
 Interviewer: [Laughing]...right.. 
 JS: I get copious letters and …and strange packages, that I kinda [sic] leave outside, or gingerly open from a distance. Because I just…I never know. I mean i never know what…weather…what is going to be sent to me is threatening- I mean, having a secret is having power,and there are a lot of people that resent people who have power, and I-and its…um…I've had threatening emails...Um, on the other hand, I've had emails that are just, you know,- shower me with praise, which is fine but it’s, just, you know, it's a challenge and it-it does occupy a portion of my time. 
 Interviewer: As I mentioned, the first three panels have already been decoded. The first is a poetic phrase, composed by you. The second, are to first former CIA Chief William Webster and the third is a passage of the opening of..ah.. King Tut's tomb. I-I mean is there a message behind all this work, in terms of how it relates to the CIA? Is the message that…that a secret holding this secret is power? As you just said? 
 JS: Well it really started out - I mean -I ha- I had an early background in archeology and...ah...things hidden from view always fascinated me. And so I guess a lot of this, especially the King Tut passage was a passage that I have been fond of my whole life. and..um.. my father was a-a directory of exhibitions with the Library of Congress for 30 years, and so I was...I was often given material that was not available to most people. I mean I was able to see it even touch the Dead Sea scrolls. So these kinds of mysteries were always fascinating to me, and so as a result, I chose to use mystery and things hidden from view as part of the CIA Project. 
 Interviewer: Jim, the bestselling author, Dan Brown, has referred to Kryptos in his novels: The Di VinciCode and the Lost Symbol. What did you make of that publicity? 
 JS: That is -that is actually been very difficult for me. Um... the work that I do and the work that I have always done, exists in a world…um…in the world of contemporary art. And those- that world of contemporary art and the world of…uh…more commercialize popular culture, which is the world in which Dan Brown exists…um…don't have [break] there is not a whole lot of overlap there. I mean the two-the two cultures -I mean one might think the other is an elitist one might think the other is low brow and so, I have...um...in some ways, been pulled into a [break] been pulled into a realm and a meaning for Kryptos which I didn't intend. And...um...so at this point he hasn't done me any favors…by...by doing that. 
 Interviewer: …What is that meaning? What's that meaning you didn't intend? 
 JS: Well I’ve-, the work that I've done fo-for almost a decade now, has been science-based. And so I basically I have come from a science [Stammering]. The work is science is science based. It deals with the reality. I what-I'm w-what I c-call a non-fiction artist 
 Interviewer: Um Hmm.. 
 JS: Dan Brown is a fiction artist. It's in- it's in a very different ilk. Now, Kryptos has a meaning of its own. It has-it has Howard Carter, it has the prose, more or less, that I wrote. Um...and it has a mystery and it has a life of its own, and it moves along through time. And I-I want that to remain Kryptos’. I don't necessarily want it to be drawn into pseudo-science, which is one of Mr. Brown's favorite topics. Um... The masonic …You know, the masonic illusions, in the Lost Symbol. And t-the in-institutional religion that he brings up in the Di Vinci Code. I mean, th-there-there is a tough thing, that when on television...ah... Mr. Brown refers to WW, which is part of my code, in which I intended to be -mean William Webster. Who was the former director of the CIA, and then he- Mr. Brown states that "Oh, no that's actually, MM, Mary Magdalene. 
 Interviewer: Hmm. 
 JS: So you can see how the meaning of something that I have intended can be completely twisted around and turned into something else. And so that's what's being difficult for me to handle. 
 Interviewer: Right, even if it has brought you more of...ah…fame or publicity, as an artist. 
 JS: Is has brought more publicity, but as I've said, the two worlds sort of collide, the two different worlds… 
 Interviewer: Mmmm. 
 JS: …and my w- the world that I exist in, mostly in being in the contemporary art world, more or less scorns you know the popular culture aspect. And so in some ways its-it’s been a negative for me. 
 Interviewer: Ah…ah…Where do you think this is going to go, now since you shared the clue “BERLIN”…um... 
 JS: Right. 
 Interviewer: Which I certainly don't know wh-what that means, other than one of my favorite cities in the world, but...ah...Do you expect that we’ll see the code broken anytime soon? 
 JS: It’s wha- It 6 of 97 characters. The odds…the odds of getting the rest--I mean if you’re a very good cryptographer, your odds are certainly improved. But the odds of-of-of filling in the lines in text around it, you know, are-it’s still difficult and very challenging code, I must say. And…um…That’s not to say won’t give another-, in another decade, when I am 75 [Interviewer laughs] I might give another clue. And maybe when I am 85, I will give another clue. And all these clues, perhaps, will add up to something that, you know, is-is infinitely crack-able. Um…I started this piece the in 1988, and installed it in like 1990. And…um...During that period of time, the Berlin Wall fell. 
 Interviewer: Right. 
 JS: So, i-it was something that was on everyone’s mind, and to say that I was not affected by it is..uh,you know, would not be true. 
 Interviewer: Well, when this [Break] Well, the...Maybe you just gave us another clue!? I’m..people [SB Laughs] ju..I hope that people are listening to this. That...Ah…um…That, in fact, everything that you say is a clue, I-I am even convinced. 
 JS: Well, yes, there is-there is a serious, [Interviewer laughs] sort of, forensic..um..[SB laughs][Interviewer laughs] dissection … 
 Interviewer: [Interviewer laughs] I’m sure. 
 JS: …of just about every word that I utter. 
 Interviewer: I have no doubt! Yeah. [Interviewer laughs] 
 JS: Yeah. 
 Interviewer: I-I am listening intently. The-It-When this fourth and final panel falls, if you will, the-the when its decoded, when the puzzle is solved, ah…whether it’s in a couple of weeks, or when you are 75 or when you’re 85. Uh…What will the successful code breaker get? I mean , after all this, is there a award? Is there-Is it just glory? Or do you…mmm...have some...you know, a bottle of champaign, some pistachios? What do they get? 
 JS: Well it’s interesting, because...uh...there is a multitude of motivations for the people that want to crack this code. And you’re right. I mean, people are regarding this as the Holy Grail, somehow. I am not quite sure…w…how I am going to thank them, or how the world will thank them, for [SB laughs] cracking this code. Um...to tell you the truth, I have no idea. [Interviewer Laughing] I mean, the people that-that try to crack this, are so concerned about their-their answer to this code that they don’t really don’t even want to tell me, … 
 Interviewer: [Interviewer Laughing] Right. 
 JS: …what their answer is. Because what if I am not who I am? They’re giving it to the world, right? Or someone else is going to find out what their answer is, and they’re going to make something out. And they’re going to become famous.. 
 Interviewer: Right. Right. 
 JS: ...and make, you know, a million dollar off of it. So, I even have to protect the people who bring their answers to me, in-in such a way that I don’t know what their whole code says, until, you know, they pass test to do it. And so it’s very interesting….because…um…Yeah , its very very serious business for a lot of people, but I don’t know what the payoff is. 
 Interviewer: Well, you might want to keep a, you know, cupcake, in the cupboard, or something.. 
 JS: Yeah a cupcake in the cupboard. [SB laughs] I mean.. [SB laughs] 
 Interviewer:[ Interviewer Laughing] cas…case somebody surprises you. 
 JS: The other people that try to crack the code have websites of their own and um…have made some money from-from running and operating these websites, and so, then there are other people…um…who run websites, who have made, you know, made a life from that. There is a multitude of people who have benefited from-from the association and from their work on Kryptos. And I think that’s all the degood. 
 Interviewer: It’s a fascinating puzzle, uh…and I thank you very much for…ah… for joining us this morning. 
 JS: Well, I-Very welcome for your asking. Thank you very much. 
 Interviewer: Bye-bye sir. 
 JS: Thanks. Bye-bye. 
 Interviewer: That was sculpture and cryptographer, Jim Sanborn. He’s the artist behind Kryptos. This past weekend, he divulged another secret, for the fourth panel of the only one that hasn’t been unveiled or decoded...ah...he gave it to the Sunday New York Times…um…so take it away folks… [ Interviewer Laughing] There could be a cupcake in it-in it for you. He joined me by phone, from Washing D.C., this morning. 
 
 2011-10-08 - Dinner at Zola's 
 Here's the best I can put together from my memory and scribbled notes: 
 Zola's Restaurant, October 8, 2011. 
 In attendance: 
 Jim Sanborn Jae Ko Ed Scheidt Mike Scheidt (Ed's son) Elonka Dunin Jim A. Jim Remington Tom Fulmer Irina Shamaeva Klaus Schmeh Gene Anderson Randy Thompson Mick McConnell Carl Ellis Nick Evancich Nicole Evancich Ed Hannon 
 Not at the dinner, but another very interesting contact on this trip, was at the Crypto Symposium, when after my Kryptos talk I met Peter Earnest, Executive Director of the Spy Museum (one of its founders). He used to be Director of Media Relations for the CIA, working under William Webster. Peter told me that he was at the Kryptos dedication ceremony, and that when Sanborn handed over the envelope at the Kryptos dedication, the envelope was handed to Earnest, who carried it around for a bit (days?) and then eventually handed it off to someone else. He wasn't entirely certain who, saying possibly "Webster's archivist" or his executive secretary. Peter remembers the envelope as being sealed, and a standard business envelope size, not manila. He and I only chatted for a few moments before the energy of the convention pulled us apart, and I was not able to track him down again despite repeated efforts. I have his card, have sent him an email and will try to followup on the phone, but haven't gotten a reply yet. 
 However, when I brought up Peter's story at the dinner with Sanborn, Jim was adamant that he had not handed the envelope to Peter Earnest, but had instead handed it to Webster, who winked at him upon accepting it. So perhaps Webster later handed off the envelope to Earnest? 
 I didn't get a lot of time to chat with Sanborn at the dinner, but another thing he did mention is that at his solution site, he has gotten 5000 solutions so far. When we asked if any of the solutions were close, he got cagey. 
 Sanborn gave us a tour of the restaurant, pointing out some of the things he did remember. One thing I hadn't noticed before, was about the sand-blasted glass above the doors (transoms?) near the kitchen, with words etched into the glass. Sanborn seemed to be implying that they'd said something different than what they're saying now, which is (I think) "Kitch" and "Dine". 
 In general, the restaurant doesn't seem to be maintaining the code stuff very well. For example, the light that used to be beaming binary text at the wall by the staircase, is now out of focus, and the numbers cannot be read. 
 I pointed out to Sanborn that one of the documents hanging on the wall was the plaintext from the Cyrillic Projector, and Sanborn seemed surprised to hear that, like he was asking if that was true, and tried to peer at the document behind the railing. 
 When Sanborn talked about the Covert Operations Fragment near our tables, he mentioned how he thought it decrypted to something about a letter-opening effort at Kennedy airport. In actuality, we've solved that fragment, and it's completely different: It decrypts to a different version of the Howard Carter quote (which I chose not to bring up at that time). To my knowledge, we haven't found any of Sanborn's encrypted pieces that refer to Kennedy airport, so hmm, something to investigate! 
 For the dinner, there were two tables, each seating about 8-9 people. I was seated roughly across from Ed Scheidt, From where I was sitting, Jim Remington was to my right, at the head of the table, then to his right was Jae Ko (Sanborn's gf), then Ed Scheidt, then an empty chair, then Nick Evancich, Nicole Evancich, and then at the far end of the table was Ed Hannon, then Carl Ellis, Tom Fulmer, Mike Scheidt, and back to me. 
 At the other table (behind me), I remember were at least Jim Sanborn, Gene Anderson, Jim A., Mick McConnell, Irina Shamaeva, Klaus Schmeh, and Randy Thompson. (I might have missed someone) 
 Ed Hannon had some detailed observations about K4 which Ed Scheidt was extremely interested in, though I couldn't hear everything that Hannon was saying since he was at the far end of the table (I wish we would have had a whiteboard!). At one point when Hannon was discussing a technique, Scheidt encouraged him to "apply that thought to IMs today", and brought up the concept of a regenerative function. Scheidt was also interested when it was brought up that K4 showed some patterns when put into rows of 21. And he asked Hannon to think about what was the smallest sample size that could be solved. 
 When I asked Ed Scheidt if he could explain to his son Mike (a non-cryptographer) how to solve K4, he said yes. 
 At the Crypto Symposium, there'd been a talk about using original poems as a key to a cipher. When Scheidt was asked if he'd taught that technique to Sanborn, he said no . 
 When we were discussing the possibility of adding binary numbers together, Ed was smiling, but I couldn't tell what it meant. 
 Ed emphasized that K4 was meant to be "human-solvable", and he brought up again the idea of being able to pass information to someone long after the fact. He said something like, "If the magic word is Rap, if I call you several years later it won't mean anything to you. How do you put Kryptos on a billboard in Moscow, so it means something?" 
 Anything that is a really lengthy process for solving, is probably not right. Any agent could solve this with a bit of training. 
 He also said that we shouldn't be able to solve K4 via a weighting of the English language. 
 After the dinner, I got together with some of the other attendees and compared notes, especially about what Sanborn had said. The most exciting piece of news was that Sanborn had confirmed that every letter in K4 is a 1-1 match. He also confirmed that BERLIN is referring to the city of Berlin, and isn't just a collection of letters like amBER LINe. 
 Someone said that Sanborn said he'd put the grid out there, via the New York Times to "get people off the rabbit trail". 
 The hint "can be used forensically". 
 One attendee who does some work for DARPA, said that he'd seen a report go by in JWICS/JWICX (Joint Warfare Intelligence System?) by a group from IARPA that was working on decryption utilities in 2007, that they'd put their program onto famous unsolved ciphers such as Kryptos. The report is classified though (can anyone in this group maybe go look for it and see if they came up with anything interesting)? 
 A couple people at the dinner said that they had a strong sense from Sanborn that he is ready to move on, and wants to see K4 solved. That at previous gatherings, Sanborn would be more elusive about hints, but at this dinner he was more direct with people, giving direct answers, such as: 
 *Irina's theory: No 
 Ed Hannon's idea: No 
 Peter Tomkins works: No 
 Someone asked him something about the way the letters are cut, but he didn't give an answer. 
 He told the story again about how there had been seeming sabotage while he was installing the sculpture, with a pickup truck. 
 He told a story about how when he was giving the answer to the CIA, he had one version in 3 envelopes (in case there were 3 people there) and one with 2 envelopes, so as to break up the solution. 
 He said that a copy of the sculpture (he was selling some at the dinner for $125) can be used to solve it. 
 He said that all 4 panels were necessary and important. 
 Enjoy, Elonka :) 
 
 2013-06-05 - Wired 
 CIA Releases Analyst's Fascinating Tale of Cracking the Kryptos Sculpture 
 The CIA has released a fascinating first-person account by a CIA analyst describing how he cracked the famed cryptographic Kryptos sculpture in 1995. 
 IT TOOK EIGHTyears after artist Jim Sanborn unveiled his cryptographic sculpture at the CIA’s headquarters for someone to succeed at cracking Kryptos’s enigmatic messages. 
 In 1998, CIA analyst David Stein cracked three of the sculpture’s four coded messages after spending 400 hours diddling over the problem with paper and pencil during many lunch breaks. 
 Though many people, on and off the CIA campus in Langley, Virginia, had tried to break the 865-character coded puzzle, Stein, a member of the agency’s Directorate of Intelligence, was the first to succeed. 
 Only his CIA colleagues knew about his achievement at the time, however, because he wasn’t allowed to go public with the news. A year later, California computer scientist Jim Gillogly stole the spotlight when he announced that he’d cracked the same three messages, only he used a Pentium II to do it. 
 CIA analyst David Stein was the first to crack three of the four encoded passages in the Kryptos sculpture. Photo courtesy of CIA via Elonka Dunin In 1999, Stein wrote a fascinating account of how he cracked the messages. The suspenseful 11-page tale, which appeared in the CIA’s classified journal Studies in Intelligence , is one of perseverance and pluck, not unlike the epic story of Captain Ahab pursuing Moby Dick (Stein himself references the literary tale in his entertaining piece). 
 This week, the National Security Archive published the now-unclassified document after receiving it from the CIA. Though the article has been published publicly before, it’s never been widely disseminated. 
 An amateur cryptographer, Stein described how suddenly his breakthrough occurred after seven years of labor: 
 I was hit by that sweetly ecstatic, rare experience that I have heard described as a ‘moment of clarity.’ All the doubts and speculations about the thousands of possible alternate paths simply melted away, and I clearly saw the one correct course laid out in front of me. Taking a fresh sheet of paper, I slowly and deliberately wrote out a new column of letters, followed by another, and then another. I continued this for several pages, then computed mathematically which rows were most likely to represent the correct plaintext letters, and searched for logical combinations between adjacent letters. I tried to contain my excitement as I witnessed the miracle of letters slowly forming together into words, one after the other. Within the next few hours, I had finished. After more than seven years encompassing some 400 hours of laboring over piles and piles of paper covered with gibberish, I was at last looking down at a paragraph of clear English text. I had broken out the first part of the Kryptos code. 
 Like Ishmael, the narrator in Moby Dick , Stein waxed philosophical at the end of his journey — and took a slight dig at Gillogly for reaching the same destination using his Pentium II shortcut. 
 Professional cryptographers almost certainly could have broken these codes much faster, and would have used superior methods. But I doubt that they would have derived as much satisfaction as I have. I didn’t use any computers to decrypt the Kryptos codes — just pencil and paper, some common sense, and a lot of perseverance. Using a computer would have cheated me out of the feeling of accomplishment that I obtained, because l’ve found that often in life the journey itself can be more gratifying than arriving at the final destination. Mountains are not climbed nor marathons run merely to reach a geographical location — there are much easier ways to accomplish these feats — but as personal and spiritual challenges to the participants. 
 When confronted with a puzzle or problem, we sometimes can lose sight of the fact that we have issued a challenge to ourselves–not to our tools. And before we automatically reach for our computers, we sometimes need to remember that we already possess the most essential and powerful problem-solving tool within our own minds. 
 Not all of Kryptos has been solved. The last coded section, consisting of 97 characters, still awaits Ahab’s harpoon. 
 OBKR UOXOGHULBSOLIFBBWFLRVQQPRNGKSSO TWTQSJQSSEKZZWATJKLUDIAWINFBNYP VTTMZFPKWGDKZXTJCDIGKUHUAUEKCAR 
 Enjoy the full article below. For an unredacted version of it (including missing images and figures) see Elonka Dunin’s comprehensive Kryptos page . 
 
 2013-07-06 - Big Tech Day 6 - CHART 
 Date approx 
 http://www.techcast.com/events/bigtechday6/maximilian-1615/?q=maximilian-1615 
 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oFKPNRpE21o 
 Transcript beginning at 8:42 
 [Then we] come to this object here. This is the sculpture Kryptos. And Kryptos for some reason the government general services administration, the CIA decided that based on my previous work with the sciences. Now granted I was working with lodestones and the invisible forces of NATURE, right?  They just made the absurd quantum leap thinking I could work with the invisible forces of mankind and so I was award the commission to do this for the CIA. 
 For those of you who don’t know about this, this has become something of infamous on the internet. And as recently as 2010, after much prodding I gave a clue out, in 2010, and the clue to the part that is at this point unsolved is starts with this question mark and it goes around here and all the way around here.  It has become one of the most famous unsolved codes of all time from what I’m told.  And so when I released that clue, the clue was Berlin.  So that’s all I’ve given.  I’ll give one clue every ten years, I figure I’m 68 years old, I’m good for maybe one and a half, so that all they ‘re going to get.  And it’ll probably end up dying with me, what it actually says. So that’s all well and good because if you make an artwork and the artwork doesn’t have something in it that will hold your attention for more than 5 minutes there’s no reason to make the artwork.  This goes for painting, sculpture, whatever it is. And so I didn’t know that this was going to hold the attention for 20 plus years and become something of a cult thing on the internet, but low and behold there it was. 
 Anyway on Kryptos, there is a chart on this side. Designed in 1588 by a French diplomat it’s call Vigenere’s tableau.  The Vigenere’s tableau is able to crack this part (circles K1) and this part (circles K2), not beyond here.  But so far these parts have been cracked, ok? Now I am what I like to refer to myself as an anathamath (sic).  Which means I have, I am afraid of mathematics, I do not have math skills. I was taught physics, but only baby physics. I was taught math in summer school because I didn’t pass math in high school. So basically there are other ways to make codes rather than using algorithms, the bane of my existence. So I worked with a cryptographer from the CIA who was retired many years before, and who just loved the idea of potentially stumping the CIA and the NSA in particular since they’re kind of enemies, so that have to work together. So we worked together, he basically gave me a history of encoded systems and I was able (slide change 11:37) 
 
 to take those systems and  use them any way I wanted, modify them so he couldn’t figure out what it said, and the go about making my sculpture.  So I used something very simple which are matrix codes for the parts that have been deciphered already. I’m not going to give you the clue to the final section, but this shows you more or less the way I did it. 
 So basically you have your plain text up here where it says “between subtle shading and the absence of light lies the nuance of illusion”, ok? That’s something that I wrote and it’s so when kryptos is cracked, when the sections are cracked, you don’t get something which is necessarily intelligible, I hope you get something that will go beyond that. I don’t know where, er, it’s up to you where it will take you to solving the next part of kryptos. I don’t know, but it’s retained its mystery to date. So this part has been cracked and you can see the keyword is inserted below the plain text—palimpsest.  I’m sure you all know what a palimpsest is. And that is inserted that way. You use Vigenere’s tableau by taking like the B in the first line and running over like in a mileage chart along the top of Vigenere's tableau and then you take the E down at the bottom and go across until you hit the letter that you want, just like the distance from Munich to Paris, right? You’ve got the E, so you take that E and you put the E into a (slide change 13:05) 
 
    
 chart that goes a different direction, you flip the chart over, turn it upside down and then you start writing down those lists that way, you turn it again or you turn it backwards and shine a light on it. But whatever it takes that’s what you do. 
 
 On this one in particular, this coding chart, these coding charts were made by me obviously by hand nothing digital involved here this was 1980, 1988 before all of us had most machines and pass cards and all of those things , or pass codes. And coding was only thought about a lot, but not necessarily in everyone’s life. So Kryptos ran along on this parallel track with code. So it was interesting though that there’s one sentence here, “And it was transmitted underground” um, “it was transmitted underground. Does anyone know about that, does Langley know about that,” right? So that’s an interesting sentence. It’s again another coding chart using abscissa (slide change 14:00) 
 
 
 And it became important, you take that chart and you flip it this way and it turns into this chart, so that the final letter in the coding system might be the W up there and so that would be the last word before the part that hasn’t been cracked yet. 
 
 So when I made that Kryptos piece we didn’t have water jet cutting, we didn’t have robotic water jet cutting.  So this was all cut with 24 assistants, 9 bosch jigsaws, 900 saw blades and 2 and a half of cutting is what it took to cut out Kryptos. 
 
 So it was a significant, every letter had to be hand drilled, every letter had to be hand cut. Nothing virtual about this, this was serious hard work and that’s the only way it could be cut out at the time. Now the thing about it is, this is the way it’s cut today. So what took me 2 ½ years I have cut routinely now in 24 hours by this kind of machine, using high pressure water. This is a rather large boon to my existence and I really appreciate it. So that’s a significant event. 
 
 Other things have happened to Kryptos.  Most recently- it’s like the energizer bunny of art works in that various things crop up on the internet or crop up in popular culture. Kryptos has been embraced by popular culture. Now we all probably know this author, Dan Brown right? So we all probably also know the term open source, right?  Well in this case it’s probably more like forced open source.  So we have Dan Brown and this is the cover of the Da Vinci Code and right along here, you can see the coordinates of part of my code.  There’s a West, North West and there are GPS coordinates in that book cover.  And then down here, if you take a mirror and read what’s in here. They’re drawn directly from the Kryptos sculpture.  This is not a person I know.  I’ve never met.  No permission was given. It was just kind of borrowed, again sort of a forced open source.  … 
 
 2013-07-10 - Wired 
 Documents Reveal How the NSA Cracked the Kryptos Sculpture Years Before the CIA 
 It took more than eight years for a CIA analyst and a California computer scientist to crack three of the four coded messages on the CIA's famed Kryptos sculpture in the late '90s. Little did either of them know it at the time, but a small group of cryptanalysts inside the NSA had beat them to it and deciphered the same three sections of Kryptos years earlier -- and they did it in less than a month, according to new documents obtained from the NSA. 
 IT TOOK MORE than eight years for a CIA analyst and a California computer scientist to crack three of the four coded messages on the CIA's famed Kryptos sculpture in the late '90s. 
 Little did either of them know that a small group of cryptanalysts inside the NSA had beat them to it, and deciphered the same three sections of Kryptos years earlier -- and they did it in less than a month, according to new documents obtained from the NSA. 
 These days the NSA is best known for its broad, indiscriminate spying on Americans and foreigners. But the Kryptos crack shows how some of the agency's smartest geeks once blew off steam in the relatively quiet days between the end of the Cold War and the September 11 attacks. 
 The popular story of Kryptos has long held that CIA analyst David Stein was the first to crack three of the cryptographic sculpture's four puzzles in 1998. 
 Stein decrypted the coded messages after spending some 400 hours' worth of lunch hours working through the puzzles using only paper and pencil. Many people, on and off the CIA campus in Langley, Virginia, had tried to break the coded puzzle, but only Stein, a member of the agency’s Directorate of Intelligence, succeeded. Stein's work on the code was kept secret, however. In 1999, he wrote a fascinating account of how he cracked three of the sculpture's four coded messages , but it was only published in an internal CIA newsletter that remained classified until years later. 
 The secrecy over Stein's achievement allowed California computer scientist Jim Gillogly to steal the spotlight a year later in 1999, when he announced that he’d also cracked the same three messages, only he used a Pentium II to do it. 
 But new documents released by the National Security Agency show how the Defense Department's spy agency beat Stein and Gillogly to the punch years earlier. 
 
 An internal NSA memo discussing the agency's success at cracking three of the sculpture's four puzzles. 
 COURTESY OF ELONKA DUNIN 
 It's a story that has largely remained buried in the NSA archives until Elonka Dunin unearthed it in a recent FOIA request. Dunin is the premier expert on Kryptos who oversees a Yahoo Group dedicated to cracking the code and also maintains a website dedicated to the sculpture . 
 Although a Baltimore Sun story about Kryptos in 2000 disclosed that the NSA had cracked three sections of the puzzle, many of the details behind the efforts were not revealed. 
 It all began in 1988 when the CIA Fine Arts Commission commissioned local artist James Sanborn to create a cryptographic sculpture for a courtyard on the CIA campus. Sanborn completed the two-part sculpture in 1990, which included stones laid out in International Morse code near the front entrance of the CIA campus, and a 12-foot-high, verdigrised copper, granite and petrified wood sculpture. The latter, which is the more famous part of Kryptos, was inscribed with four encrypted messages composed from some 1,800 letters carved out of the copper plate. 
 One of the memos notes that the layout of the two-part sculpture was "a landscaping scheme designed to recall the natural stone out-cropping that existed on the site before the Agency, and that will endure as do mountains." The placement of the sculpture "in a geologic context reinforces the text's 'hidden-ness' as if it were a fossil or an image frozen in time." 
 In 1991, while on a trip to the CIA, a group of NSA cryptanalysis "interns" diligently scribbled all the letters from the sculpture onto sheets of paper and brought them back to the NSA so curious analysts there could take a crack at it. In December 1991 a group of NSA analysts met in a conference room at the NSA to discuss the sculpture and what methods of decryption they might apply, including classified methods used internally by the NSA. 
 A memo about this meeting indicates that "any discussion of 'in-house' techniques or applications (being classified) are not mentioned in this text as it is to be unclassified." The memo also included a note to participants not to discuss their efforts to crack the puzzle in public, as some of the methods they used might be classified, as well as a message at the bottom of the memo indicating that "these notes were prepared at NO expense to the US Government." 
 After that initial NSA meeting, however, nothing further was done on the puzzle. Over the next year, the CIA tried to crack the sculpture on its own, but with no success. 
 The sculpture remained unsolved until 1992, when Adm. William O. Studeman, the CIA's then-deputy director and a former NSA director, issued a formal challenge to his former colleagues at the NSA to solve the CIA's new courtyard puzzle. The NSA's director at the time, Vice Admiral Mike McConnell, announced the challenge during an internal ceremony at the NSA, and a small cadre of cryptanalysts from the agency's Z Group -- the internal name for the cryptanalysts division -- "enthusiastically responded." 
 Left on their own, NSA employees had shown little passion for cracking the ciphers, but once a formal challenge was on the table from the CIA, it was hard to resist. The group was so intent on cracking the code that they formed an informal task force in November 1992, according to the recently released documents, which include a number of internal NSA memos describing how they cracked the ciphers. 
 Working from the transcription obtained by interns a year earlier, they quickly determined, using computer diagnostic tools, that the sculpture consisted of four parts -- using at least three different ciphers -- and a cryptographic table based on an encryption method developed in the 16th century by a Frenchman named Blaise de Vigenere that was key to helping them solve parts of the puzzle. 
 They were sure to note that subsequent analysis and solutions of the code "did not require any computer power" but were done by hand. 
 They quickly discovered that the encrypted sections included intentional spelling errors made by artist James Sanborn, and misaligned characters set higher on a line of text than characters around them. 
 Then "within two days of receiving the information tasking from Chief, Z," they had solved parts one through three of the puzzle. They spent another day on the fourth section, but very quickly "a decision was made to stop any further work" on it. "Given the suspected cryptography, the last section is too short to solve without diverting a great deal of effort from operational problems," they wrote in the memo. 
 
 NSA memo discussing how the cryptanalysts achieved their first breakthrough in deciphering the sculpture. 
 COURTESY OF ELONKA DUNIN 
 In the end, it was just three analysts who solved the codes, one tackling each section of the puzzle. Although the names are redacted in the documents released by the NSA, Dennis McDaniels was identified as one of the crackers in the *Baltimore Sun *article. Ken Miller was also identified as another member of the group, though someone knowledgeable about the project told Wired that he didn't decipher any of the sections but worked closely with the group to write up their notes. 
 In June 1993, after the three parts were cracked, an internal letter announcing the feat was sent to Admiral McConnell at the NSA, marked "For Official Use Only" and informing him that the deed was done. It was returned with a request to forward the note to Admiral Studeman at the CIA, no doubt with an air of glee and arrogance that the NSA had beat the CIA at cracking its own puzzle. Another scribbled note on the memo read, "Great Story!" 
 The documents describe their efforts through "many wrong turns" to arrive at the solutions. 
 The first part of the sculpture used a periodic polyalphabetic substitution cipher using 10 alphabets, and when decrypted was a poetic phrase that Sanborn had composed himself: "Between subtle shading and the absence of light lies the nuance of iqlusion" ("iqlusion" was an intentional misspelling of illusion). 
 Part two used a periodic polyalphabetic substitution cipher using 8 alphabets. When decrypted, the passage hinted at something buried: 
 It was totally invisible. How's that possible? They used the Earth's magnetic field. x The information was gathered and transmitted underground to an unknown location. x Does Langley know about this? They should: It's buried out there somewhere. x Who knows the exact location? Only WW. This was his last message. x Thirty-eight degrees fifty-seven minutes six point five seconds north, seventy-seven degrees eight minutes forty-four seconds west. ID by rows. 
 The cryptanalysts correctly guessed that WW referred to William Webster, which Wired confirmed in 2005 during an interview with artist Sanborn . "The coordinates," the memo noted, "refer to the location of or a location within the Central Intelligence Agency." But the significance of the I.D. by Rows? That remained "undetermined," the NSA's puzzle crackers wrote. 
 In fact, Sanborn had made an error in the puzzle and inadvertently introduced a typo in the section. The mistake involved an "x" that he intentionally deleted from the end of a line in section two for aesthetic reasons, to keep the sculpture visually balanced. The "x" was supposed to signify a period or section break at the end of a phrase, but Sanborn removed it thinking it wouldn't affect the way the puzzle was deciphered. It turned out the "x" made all the difference, however. 
 Instead of "ID by rows" it actually should have been deciphered to read "layer two," though code breakers wouldn't discover this until years after the NSA cryptanalysts had their crack at the code. 
 Part three used a keyed columnar transposition cipher, which the cryptanalysts partly diagnosed solely by "eyeballing" the text. 
 "The most likely explanation for this is a transposition system," they write, "perhaps a keyed columnar transposition. In such a system, the plain text is inscribed horizontally into a matrix, normally a rectangle, and then the latter are extracted vertically, according to a pre-determined sequence." 
 When decrypted, it was a paraphrased page taken from the diary of archaeologist Howard Carter describing the opening of a door in King Tut's tomb on Nov. 26, 1922. 
 Slowly, desperately slowly, the remains of passage debris that encumbered the lower part of the doorway was removed. With trembling hands I made a tiny breach in the upper left-hand corner. And then, widening the hole a little, I inserted the candle and peered in. The hot air escaping from the chamber caused the flame to flicker, but presently details of the room within emerged from the mist. x Can you see anything? q 
 According to a former Defense Department cryptanalyst who spoke with Wired, McDaniels was responsible for cracking section three and did it in just six hours lying on his living room couch with paper and pencil after coming home exhausted one day from playing volleyball. McDaniels is now retired from the NSA and declined to speak with Wired about his work on the sculpture. But the source told Wired that McDaniels had been out all day playing volleyball and came home around 10pm. 
 "He plopped down on the couch in the living room, picked up his draft notes for K3," the source said. "He had tinkered with it before but could never get into it. He knew it was just basic transposition, so he started with the letter Q and [the letter U after it] and found there were five instances of the letter U, and he just tried all five of those. Then he had to try every other vowel that came after and he finally found something that broke it. By then it was about 4am and he was done." 
 Unfortunately the fourth section stymied the NSA code breakers, as it has continued to do other cryptanalysts for 23 years. The documents noted that "although ideas abound" for deciphering it, the final 97 characters of the sculpture "continue to elude solution." 
 OBKR UOXOGHULBSOLIFBBWFLRVQQPRNGKSSO TWTQSJQSSEKZZWATJKLUDIAWINFBNYP VTTMZFPKWGDKZXTJCDIGKUHUAUEKCAR 
 They speculated that this section might employ a combination of the techniques used in other sections. "First the message is encrypted using some set of alphabets," they write, "as was done in the first and third breakthroughs, and then the cipher is put through a transposition, such as that used in the second breakthrough." But even with that they were never able to solve it. 
 In 2010, Sanborn, surprised that the final section had remained unsolved for so long, and perhaps feeling guilty about an error he had made in the sculpture that misled puzzle-solvers for years, decided to disclose six of the 97 letters in the last section . The six letters — NYPVTT — are the 64th through 69th letters of the final section and when deciphered spell out the word “BERLIN.” 
 The clue has yet to be the breakthrough that code crackers had hoped it would be, however, and the last section still remains unsolved. 
 Even when that final section is solved, however, sleuths still won't know what the sculpture means. The deciphered text contains a riddle, which will require them to be on the CIA grounds in order to solve it. 
 "In part of the code that's been deciphered, I refer to an act that took place when I was at the agency and a location that's on the ground of the agency, " Sanborn told Wired in 2005. He may be referring to something he buried on the CIA grounds, though he won't say for sure. The decrypted text gives latitude and longitude coordinates (38 57 6.5 N, 77 8 44 W), which Sanborn has said refer to "locations of the agency." So sleuths will have to first decipher the code then find their way onto the CIA grounds and locate that place in order to finally discover what it all means. 
 2013-10-28 - American Cryptogram Association convention 
 Here are some things that were covered at the American Cryptogram Association convention. Questions were asked to both Jim Sanborn and Ed Scheidt at a dinner, I believe after that actual convention where Scheidt was a speaker. 
 Apparently someone was video taping a portion of it but I haven’t come across it yet. 
 This was asked right out of the gate… 
 “how about another clue?” to which Jim replied (paraphrasing) “you’ll maybe find out about that in a couple of weeks or so”. 
 It was asked again if the letters BERLIN were the city of Berlin to which Jim confirmed again that it is. 
 It was asked if N decodes to B, Y decodes to E, etc, etc. and Jim confirmed it does. Emphatically.  
 Jim Sanborn rattled through the entire crib: N = B, Y = E, P = R, V = L, T = I, T = N 
 When the same question was asked to Ed, Jim cut in and said “I’m the only one who knows.” 
 It was asked if N decodes to B or encodes to B, and Jim stated “ decodes ”. 
 It was asked if K4 was a “one-off”. Some discussion ensued about the definition of “one-off”, but Ed looked to Jim and said “well Jim, how are we going to answer that one?”. To which Jim simply replied “ we don’t answer it ”. 
 Elonka jumped in to remind Ed that he once told her that Kryptos uses a system unknown to anyone on the planet. Ed stated he didn’t recall that conversation, and back-pedaled out of saying anything more. 
 Someone asked if anything was buried on the CIA grounds relating to Kryptos and Jim said YES and went on to explain how a USGS marker was buried somewhere but was removed later. 
 Klauss:Was something placed by kryptos that we need access to to solve kryptos? 
 Jim: Yes, there is something buried adjacent to Kryptos. Jae and I went back to visit a couple of years ago, and they had removed it, but it is important. 
 Donna: Well, since it is not there anymore, can you tell us what it was or do you want to wait for that?, 
 Jim: The thing that was buried is a bronze USGS marker. It was half buried. It had little cross hairs on the top of it. 
 Jim went on to say that he still believes there’s something to be gained if we study his encryption charts that he released to the New York Times. He talked about how he released those in the context of we all wondered if the misspelled words were really mistakes, but he didn’t elaborate past that. JS was also involved in some smaller group discussions where individuals said he brought up his K1/K2 matrix and seemed mystified no one has gotten any thing more from it. 
 Unknown: can we solve K4 without solving k1-k3 first? Jim: Yes,  but K5 cannot be solved without K4. 
 I’m sure more was discussed and/or asked but what I’ve included are what most people that were there are declaring as the meat and potatoes of the Q&A. I’ve been searching for what was said about K4 being a “one-off” and what was meant by it but I haven’t found much. Quite a bit of the debate at this point has been focused on JS’s encryption sheets, the USGS marker, and what theories or systems can be thrown out based on the information provided. If I come across more I’ll send it your way. 
 Thanks, Z 
 
 2014-10-06 - Eurogamer 
 The game developer, the CIA, and the sculpture driving them crazy 
 "I work at Langley. I think I can get you in." 
 **Feature **by Christian Donlan Features Editor 
 Updated on 6 Oct 2014 
 Elonka Dunin has been to the CIA headquarters in Langley, Virginia, on two occasions, and on her first visit, she was turned away by a man with a gun. 
 It was a few months after 11th September 2001, and Dunin was in Washington DC to spend Thanksgiving with her cousin who, due to a home printer malfunction, had narrowly missed a briefing at the Pentagon on the morning American Airlines Flight 77 hit the building. After hugging and catching up on things and visiting the Pentagon memorial, Dunin's cousin asked if there was anything else she wanted to do while she was in DC. Dunin, who works in video game development at Simutronics Corp in St Louis and had never been to the capitol before, thought for a minute before nodding. "I want to see Kryptos." 
 Although Dunin is now recognised as one of the leading authorities on Kryptos, arranging that first sighting would not be easy. Kryptos is an unusual piece of corporate art and, since the corporation in question is the Central Intelligence Agency, your chances of just rolling up at the gates and getting inside to take a look at it are not high. Kryptos was commissioned by the agency in 1988 for its new headquarters, and the piece was finished and installed in 1990. In essence, it's a large wood and copper sculpture shaped like a scroll or perhaps a flag, with its face divided into sections. These sections contain four stencilled ciphertexts, sometimes known as K1 through K4. To date, the first three texts have been cracked. Only K4, almost a quarter of a century after it was installed in a building that's atypically full of people of the code-breaking persuasion, continues to repel all efforts. 
 Dunin had heard about Kryptos through her own recreational code-breaking activities, and K4's unwillingness to reveal its secrets was maddening to her. I've spent the last few months talking to a number of amateur cryptanalysts, and they seem strangely affronted by the ciphers that refuse to yield - close up, it's an oddly personal business. All things considered, it was probably worth wasting a day in DC to try and see Kryptos, then, even if, just to get near to the courtyard where it stands, you have to first learn where in Langley the CIA headquarters is actually situated. As far as Dunin could tell, the building had no street address, and in 2001 it was not on many maps. Eventually, she had to work from references to it culled from the directions to a children's soccer game that she had found on the internet: "Drive down the highway, past the exit to the CIA ..." 
 After all that, you still have to gain admittance. That's not easy either. "We figured we'd drive along the outside, maybe peek over the wall and see Kryptos that way," says Dunin when we chat over Skype. "But no, there's no service road, and it's just this large wall, barbed wire at the top, guard shack and armed guards pouring out asking very reasonable questions after September 11th: 'Who are you and why are you here?'" 
 Faced with guns, Dunin and her cousin decided they would try and talk their way in. "We said, 'Hey, we're just here to see Kryptos,'" she laughs. "The guards relaxed and said, 'Fine: official business only.' We thought, what if we get an invitation from our senator? 'Nope, official business only.' Is there a public tour day? 'No, sorry - official business only.' So: big guys, guns, and eventually we just drove away." 
 That probably should have been the end of it. Dunin likes to tell people that she has a short attention span - she mentions this three times over the course of our hour-long chat, in fact. It doesn't appear to be true, however. In the days and months following Thanksgiving, she couldn't let the aborted visit to the CIA go, and she kept turning the guards' phrase over in her head : Official business only. Official business only.*What she needed, then, was some official business. 
 Maths runs in Dunin's family. Her father taught mathematics at UCLA. Her great grandfather was the vice-minister of finance for Poland. "I think I have just a genetic predisposition for math," she tells me, and that sounds like a safe assumption. As a kid, she saw the numbers in everything. When she was hanging out at the dime store with all the other kids, she was drawn to the puzzle books rather than the comic books. "I didn't want the crossword puzzles," she says. "I wanted the logic puzzles. Most of all, I wanted the puzzles that had something to do with codes." 
 As a result, her childhood was dominated by codes - and by a certain persistent streak that emerged early. A neighbourhood friend was a boy scout studying cryptography for a merit badge. "He had some books on codes," she remembers, "so I was always over at his house. 'Tell me about this, tell me about that?'" Finally, he finished his project and gave Dunin all his code books to get rid of her. She continued to tinker playfully with the world of cryptography well into adulthood, but it was only after a trip to Dragon Con in Atlanta around 2000 that she started to make a name for herself in the field. 
 At Dragon Con, where she was giving a presentation about her work making video games, she fell in with speakers who were there to talk about computer security. One of them handed her a flyer related to PhreakNIC v3.0, a cryptographic puzzle that had yet to be cracked. The way Dunin tells it, she took the puzzle home and - over a weekend stuck indoors with the flu - quickly became obsessed and then solved it. It came apart in layers, apparently. Aside from a confidence boost, PhreakNIC also provided Dunin her first mention of the Kryptos sculpture. A line in the text pointed her towards this weird artwork that the CIA had commissioned back in the late 1980s. 
 It was codes, then, that would ultimately provide the official business that granted this video game developer access to Kryptos. "Around 2002, I was calling the FBI a lot," she tells me. "I talk to them periodically, since I have a game company so there's credit card fraud I have to deal with. With one of the agents I was speaking to, following September 11th, I said, 'Hey can I help out with the war on terrorism in any way?' He said no. And I kept asking and kept asking, and he said, 'Well, what is it you know about?' I said, 'Oh, I do this cryptography stuff with the hacker scene and there's Uuencoding, ROT13, steganography...'" 
 I had to look all of those up. Steganography is the name given to the process of hiding a message inside something else - often a digital picture. Blizzard apparently uses the technique to encode Battle.net IDs and IP addresses into screenshots taken in WOW, for example (prior to sending them off to the lizard people who run the world from a base hidden in the hollow interior of the moon). The mention of steganography interested the FBI agent, because shortly after the September 11th attacks, rumours were starting to circulate that al-Qaida might be making use of this particular technique for sending its own encrypted messages between operatives. The local FBI bureau in St Louis felt that it was out of its depth here. Could Dunin maybe brief some agents on the subject? 
 "The agent kind of thought I was going to give this little 10-minute briefing," laughs Dunin. "But I researched the hell out of it. I put a 70-slide presentation together, covering what kind of codes al-Qaida was using." Ultimately, it didn't seem very likely that al-Qaida was using steganography at all, incidentally: the rumour came from an Italian tabloid reporting on laptops seized by the police who had arrested a cell at the Via Quaranta mosque in Milan. The laptops had a couple of pictures of naked women on the hard drives, leading Dunin to conclude that "sometimes pictures of pretty girls are just pictures of pretty girls." No matter: Dunin's briefing was well received and she quickly started accepting invitations to give the talk all over the country. 
 "I thought: maybe I could use this steganography stuff as the official business that's going to get me into the CIA," she says. "So every time I would give the talk, I would show some pictures of Kryptos on a slide - one picture that didn't have anything hidden inside of it, and one that did have a secret message hidden inside of it. That's to show an example of steganography and how you can't see the message with the naked eye." 
 Dunin kept up with the strategy for quite a while. Improbable as this sounds, it eventually paid off. "One day I'm at Defcon, which is the big hacker convention in Las Vegas," she says. "I'm in the roof tent at the Alexis Park Hotel, there's about 1000 people there and I'm doing my talk. Showing these slides on Kryptos. At the end of the talk people come up to me and give me business cards and whatnot. One of them leans across the podium, looks me in the eye, and says, 'I work at Langley. I think I can get you in.'" 
 They gave Dunin a name and a phone number and - after time spent checking that she was not being conned - she eventually received an invitation to talk at the CIA. An invitation that also covered an opportunity to see Kryptos. "It was great!" she says, describing the building as a typical corporate headquarters for the most part, albeit one with a lot of curved walls to confound bugs and listening devices. Kryptos sits in a courtyard just beyond the cafeteria. "I got to do some rubbings of the sculpture, there was a couple of pictures taken of me, and I thought that was going to be the end of it at that point," she laughs. "I thought, oh, that was great - I got in to see Kryptos, I've achieved my goal. Good! Now I've got games to write." 
 It wasn't the end of it, however. In fact, it was the beginning of a mission that continues to this day: a mission to see the final section of Kryptos cracked - to see the final message revealed. 
 Dunin's a natural organiser, so it's perhaps not surprising that she rose through the Kryptos hierarchy so quickly - so accidentally, even. One of the few people outside of the CIA to have actually seen the statue personally, when she returned home to St Louis, she put her rubbings of the stencilled ciphertext online. People immediately started to ask her questions about them, and she was swiftly drawn into the mysterious world of Kryptos fanatics. She co-founded the Yahoo group that still remains a focal point for people trying to solve the K4 text and, along the way, she began to maintain one of the most useful websites covering all things related to the sculpture - a place where people could turn in order to answer many of the questions they might have about this strange corporate installation. 
 Questions like: who made it? This was an early one, as it happens. "Well, the sculptor Jim Sanborn made it," says Dunin. "Then people asked, 'Well, has Jim Sanborn done any other crypto sculptures?' I said, 'I don't know.'" Dunin contacted Sanborn's agent asking for a list of Sanborn's work. "They said, 'No, that's impossible! Nobody could make a list of everything Sanborn's ever done.' So I thought: okay, here we go again, here's a new goal for me." 
 Dunin started writing to art galleries all over the country, contacting anyone who had ever shown Sanborn's art. With every connection she made, she would ask if they had an old programme left over from the Sanborn exhibition. Old programmes tend to contain short biographies, and those biographies, in turn, often included the names of other galleries that had shown Sanborn's stuff in the past. The web began to extend. "My apartment's slowly turning into Smithsonian West," laughs Dunin. "I'm posting all this stuff on my website - things Sanborn's done beside Kryptos, and yes, he'd done some other encrypted sculptures." The artist was starting to take shape in her mind. And then, one day, Sanborn himself called Dunin out of the blue and left a message on her voicemail. 
 It was not the most auspicious of introductions. "'Who are you and why do you have a webpage about me?' he asks," says Dunin. "Since then of course we've met and we're good friends. We've been out to eat, we've been out drinking." (Dunin buys him drinks whenever she can, apparently, "to pump him for i nformation.") "I've stayed at his house, met members of his extended family. I've hosted gatherings at DC which he comes to and which Ed Scheidt comes to. He's the retired chairman of the CIA's Cryptographic Center who taught Sanborn about codes for use in the Kryptos sculpture in the first place." 
 Sanborn seems as much of a riddle as Kryptos itself - or he's at least a very worthy creator for a sculpture that has sat under the noses of some of the world's foremost cryptanalysts for so long without crumbling. A native of Washington DC, he was born into the kind of mysterious quasi-governmental world that Kryptos plays with. His mother was a concert pianist and photo researcher, his father was head of exhibitions at the Library of Congress. 
 Originally, Sanborn had intended to become an architect. One day, however, when making a maquette of a building, he realised he would rather be a sculptor instead. His work since then has often revolved around a theme that is frequently referred to as the invisible made visible : codes - information hidden in plain sight - are just one of the ways he explores this idea. 
 "He's a very tall, very strong man," says Dunin when I ask her about what she makes of him. "Very strong opinions. He gets involved with the topic and then he gets very, very involved with that topic. Before Kryptos, he had never created a sculpture that had text on it of any kind. He'd done some things with engravings and compass roses and magnetism but never anything with text. Then after Kryptos, he did many sculptures that had text. And he did many sculptures that were encrypted. All of the encryption systems that he used through his entire body of work? All of the types used are on Kryptos except for one. Some of his sculptures use binary code, and we haven't found that on Kryptos yet. That may imply that K4 uses binary." 
 Or it might not. Code-breaking involves social engineering as well as maths: you need to draw a bead on your subject. When Dunin was breaking the PhreakNIC code, she claims to have found out everything about the man who created it, from past girlfriends to the way he decorated his apartment. Sanborn's work should be a rich source of information, in other words, but his interests seem frustratingly wide-ranging. "After Kryptos, he went onto a segment of his work where he was fascinated by the way light was projected onto things," says Dunin. "He went out into the southwest of the US at the middle of the night and he'd beam a pattern of light onto a mountain and use time-lapse photography to record it. There's dozens and dozens of pictures. They look like they're made in computer graphics, but they're Sanborn beaming light on mountains." 
 Following that, Sanborn became obsessed with atomic history, actually going so far as to build a working particle accelerator in his own back yard. "It was this huge tower, probably about five storeys high," says Dunin. "It had this huge metallic sphere on top, and when he turned it on it would make this huge noise and lightning bolts would come off it. It was - ugh - it just terrified me. You can see it on Google Earth if you were to look at his house. I think he was messing with way too much radiation." 
 Sanborn's currently working on installations revolving around art that is stolen from Cambodia. "You know, theft and the entire thing of these stone figurines that they'll just chop off at the feet and then ship off," says Dunin. "Sometimes they'll remove the head because the head can be sold separately from the body." Sanborn's actually infiltrated some of the art theft and forgery rings involved: he gets involved, and then he gets very, very involved. "He's putting all of this into an exhibit which is going to be very compelling," says Dunin. "There's one part that I saw in his studio where you see the stone feet and then the body is being lifted by ropes from the feet. It's done in a way that almost looks like Japanese rope bondage." 
 Despite all of this, Kryptos remains Sanborn's signature work, although that's in a suitably elusive manner, since it's a signature work that almost nobody has access to. Frustratingly, I'm not sure Kryptos really comes across in pictures, either. The scale of it can be hard to judge, and along with scale lies the whole question of the installation's physical presence. Does it look flimsy? Does it have much substance ? I ask Dunin whether, after seeing Kryptos in real life, she could even decide whether it's beautiful or not. What's its impact when that curving scroll of copper is right in front of you? 
 That's a hard question to answer. "Well for me there was so much about the cryptography that I was more interested in the letters than the art," she admits. "It's about 12 feet tall, 20 feet long. I was interested in the way that light was passing through the letters and reflecting off things." She searches around for the right words and then gives up. "I guess you could say I thought it was very striking ." 
 As for the ciphertext itself, although Sanborn collaborated with the CIA's Ed Scheidt to create the code, the actual messages are his own work. It turns out that there's little sense of revelation even here, though. K1 through K3 have been broken for some time, but their contents, once revealed, only seem to enhance the mystery, to sharpen the contrast. The solutions draw you inwards rather than outwards - as does a certain playful confusion surrounding their cracking. 
 "The first person to publicly solve the first three parts was Jim Gillogly, a Californian computer scientist," says Dunin. "This was in 1999. It made international news." Once Gillogly announced his solution, however, the CIA made its own announcement. "They said, 'Oh we have an analyst who solved those three parts as well - in 1998,'" says Dunin. "'It was just an internal newsletter and we didn't announce it publicly.'" Then the NSA came forward. "They announced, 'We solved those three parts too but we're not going to tell you who and we're not going to tell you when,'" Dunin laughs. "Very NSA. Since then I've found out everything about that group. I knew who was in the group and when they did it. It was late 1992. And then they submitted a memo in 1993." 
 K1 is the shortest of the messages: "BETWEEN SUBTLE SHADING AND THE ABSENCE OF LIGHT LIES THE NUANCE OF IQLUSION", it reads, and Dunin tells me that Sanborn has admitted this is an original sentence of his own construction. "It was written by him with carefully chosen wording," says Dunin. "That's a very intriguing statement. So why did he choose that? Did he need letters to line up in a certain way or what?" 
 K2 is longer and stranger. Again, the text was constructed by Sanborn, and it seems written so as to evoke the sense of an intercepted spy broadcast (the WW mentioned refers to William H. Webster, the CIA director from 1987 to 1991): 
 "IT WAS TOTALLY INVISIBLE HOWS THAT POSSIBLE ? THEY USED THE EARTHS MAGNETIC FIELD X THE INFORMATION WAS GATHERED AND TRANSMITTED UNDERGRUUND TO AN UNKNOWN LOCATION X DOES LANGLEY KNOW ABOUT THIS ? THEY SHOULD ITS BURIED OUT THERE SOMEWHERE X WHO KNOWS THE EXACT LOCATION ? ONLY WW THIS WAS HIS LAST MESSAGE X THIRTY EIGHT DEGREES FIFTY SEVEN MINUTES SIX POINT FIVE SECONDS NORTH SEVENTY SEVEN DEGREES EIGHT MINUTES FORTY FOUR SECONDS WEST X LAYER TWO" 
 "Now K2, Sanborn says that this is related to the Morse code messages that are other sculptures he placed at CIA," says Dunin. Kryptos, it transpires, is only one of several different sculptures that Sanborn created around the CIA headquarters: the other works include large rock slabs about a foot thick, tilted up out of the ground to look like geological seams. Between these slabs are copper sheets with morse code messages on them. "He also has an engraved compass rose and a magnetic lodestone, and what we call the Triangle Block - it's about a foot in diameter and doesn't have morse code messages or any engravings," sighs Dunin. "It's just very intriguing that it's there." 
 Also around Kryptos is a pool, benches made of granite and other stones, and a duck pond. "The entire semi-circular garden area that's in the courtyard by the cafeteria was designed by Sanborn," says Dunin, who even went to the General Services Administration to see the correspondence relating to the construction of the installation. "Sanborn's original intent was that as you walked in towards the CIA there would be a series of sculptures with codes, with the codes becoming more and more complex the deeper you got into the building." 
 As for the co-ordinates mentioned in K2, they point to an area about 150 feet southeast of the sculpture. Sanborn is adamant that he measured the distance very carefully. "Now, what's at that spot?" Dunin asks. "There's nothing there that we found. And Sanborn just gets cagey about it. He says there's multiple levels to the CIA. There's probably office space under there. Maybe he hid something under a ceiling panel?" 
 K3, finally, is particularly exciting to read because there's a good chance you might recognise the text yourself - it's an edited quote from Howard Carter, describing the discovery of Tutankhamen's tomb in 1922: 
 "SLOWLY DESPARATLY SLOWLY THE REMAINS OF PASSAGE DEBRIS THAT ENCUMBERED THE LOWER PART OF THE DOORWAY WAS REMOVED WITH TREMBLING HANDS I MADE A TINY BREACH IN THE UPPER LEFT HAND CORNER AND THEN WIDENING THE HOLE A LITTLE I INSERTED THE CANDLE AND PEERED IN THE HOT AIR ESCAPING FROM THE CHAMBER CAUSED THE FLAME TO FLICKER BUT PRESENTLY DETAILS OF THE ROOM WITHIN EMERGED FROM THE MIST X CAN YOU SEE ANYTHING Q ?" 
 For the non-cryptanalyst, this may be Kryptos' most generous trick: as you begin to read, you get that warm rush of recognition. *I know this!*Carter's talking about the magic of discovery, and if you know the passage in question, you are allowed to experience a little of the cryptanalyst's sense of discovery vicariously. Something that has an obvious context suddenly emerges from the chaos - a signal is pulled from the obscuring noise. 
 Sanborn had read the Howard Carter account when he was a child and was transfixed by it. He apparently put the text in Kryptos because he thinks that solving a code is similar to the work performed by an archaeologist. "They're both sifting through layer after layer after layer to get to the message underneath," says Dunin. "So many of the things in Kryptos also refer to this idea of layers. Layers and things underground. It all kind of ties together." 
 It's been two decades since the first three sections of Kryptos were broken. Two decades, during which K4 remains as resistant to cryptanalysts as ever. Could it be that's it's simply encrypted in a vastly different manner to the first three sections? Yes, apparently - although there's probably nothing simple about it. 
 "Scheidt has said that the fourth part is encrypted in a different way," confirms Dunin. "When we solved the first three parts we had the benefits of the English language, which mean that we could count letters, we could do frequency analysis, by which I mean we could look for letters that are more common than others. That's the number one code-breaking technique that we still use. Even if a code doesn't involve letters - say it involves tones sent from a bank ATM - you still look for repeating patterns. Patterns are what take a code apart." 
 Unfortunately, Scheidt's said that he removed the advantages provided to cryptanalysts by the English language for K4. "He's said our challenge is to first figure out the masking technique that was used," says Dunin. "What that masking technique is, we don't know. It could be that he removed all the vowels from the plaintext. It could be that the plaintext was converted into binary, ones and zeroes, and then encrypted. It could be like a book cipher, in which the key lies with a specific book. With a book cipher, there are still some patterns, but it would definitely remove a lot of them." She laughs. "Then again, it's possible that he was misdirecting us. He does work for the CIA." 
 All of which rather neatly demonstrates the problems facing Dunin and the Kryptos code-breakers. They work within a terrifying absence of context. Almost everything is worth investigating. Almost no avenues can be safely ignored. 
 This must be exhausting. Take the idea of a book cipher. Find the book - and the right section - and you can crack the code with the key it contains. Could the book possibly be right in front of us? Could it be Carter's famous account of the Tutankhamen dig, The Discovery of the Tomb of Tutankhamen? If so, which copy of that book? 
 "Ah yes, November 26th, 1922," says Dunin with practised ease. "I think the book itself, I would need to check, but I'm pretty sure it's in the Cambridge Rare Book Library. We've already tried getting our hands on it. It's usually out on loan to one place or another. Sanborn did attend Cambridge, so it's an interesting link. It's possible. It's possible." (The book's actually in Oxford, as Dunin clarified by email after we spoke. Similarly, Sanborn attended Oxford and not Cambridge.) 
 *It's possible.*Dunin's echoing Sanborn's stock answer for any and all questions relating to Kryptos when she says that. The problem is that everything's possible. Is a cryptanalyst's life just about disappearing down rabbit holes and not knowing if you're even in the right back garden, let alone that you're following the right rabbit? 
 "Yeah," says Dunin. "You go down a direction and you say, 'Does this lead anywhere? No? Okay, let's start again. Does this lead anywhere? Oh, wait, that first thing that I thought didn't lead anywhere actually did lead somewhere, I just turned at the wrong junction.' That's a lot of solving codes. It's moving Scrabble tiles around. It's just trying lots of different things and seeing if anything emerges." 
 So, yes, you could start with books. Or you could start with light. Take K1: "BETWEEN SUBTLE SHADING AND THE ABSENCE OF LIGHT..." Couldn't that be a reference to a time of day? 
 Dunin and her fellow cryptanalysts have already been there too. "Guess what? It's possible," she laughs. "Sanborn's fascinated by light. We've tried making 3D models of Kryptos and then changing the way the sun shines through the stencilled letters at different times of year. But it's the same thing after a while: even if someone could come to you and say, 'Yes, it's related to light,' we'd still need to know the exact way it's related to that and possibly to K4." 
 Still, there are clues - even though the clues don't get you as far as you might like. "Sanborn's said that the method he used for part four, it made sense to him as an artist, " says Dunin. "Who knows? Aesthetically? It's possible that he took a code system and rotated it 90 degrees, say. We have many videos of him taking a code chart and rotating it. It's one of the things we look at. But again, codes are such that even if I taught you how to solve codes and I pointed you at Kryptos and I told you it uses a Vigenère cipher, a polyalphabetic system with two keys, and I told you what the keys are, it would still be very difficult to solve because there are so many variations of what a Vigenère cipher means. I mean, are you using a cipher alphabet or a plaintext alphabet? Are you starting at the top or are you starting at the side? Of the two keys, is one on the top and the other on the side? It's like those rabbit holes. We may have gone down the right one at some point, we just didn't take the right hop." 
 All of which raises a fundamental question: what is Kryptos when you get down to it? If it's an artwork, what kind of artwork is it? Where is the heart of it located? In the copper and wood that makes up the sculpture and the stone and water that makes up the gardens around it? In the carving of the letters? In the thousands of hours of time spent by others figuring it all out, or trying and failing to figure it all out? Is this the invisible made visible? Is Kryptos about the human need not just to be, but to know ? 
 Or maybe it's a game. I'm interested to hear Dunin's take on this, given her day job. The part of her that likes codes and the part of her that makes games - are those parts related? 
 "Yes," she says quickly, and then thinks about it. "Designing games involves creating a set of rules. And codes are definitely operating by creating a similar set of rules. Recreational ciphers are definitely a game. It's a single-player game, and some people would argue the fine points of what is a puzzle and what is a game. To me, anything that's this kind of process of trying to figure something out, you're trying to do it for fun, it has a set of rules and generally a goal? I'd be comfortable classifying that as a game." 
 In truth, Dunin's work on both games and Kryptos seem remarkably similar. In both contexts, she's a facilitator - a producer in games who ensures that the team's vision gets made, and co-moderator of that Yahoo group focused on solving Kryptos who ensures that everyone has the information they need to pursue their own avenues of inquiry. It's a role she naturally gravitates towards. "I have definitely created games, usually within game jams," she tells me. "Sometimes I've been the sole designer, creator, programmer, everything. But yes, I'm good at producing, I'm good at what we call cat-herding. 
 "With Kryptos, I do some of my own code-cracking and I know that for most people doing the design is the fun part of making the games," she says. "They wouldn't dream of being a developer if they weren't involved with the design. That's fine. I prefer to say, 'Let me know what you want to do, I'll make sure it happens.' That's what I see as fun. I just go with what I enjoy." 
 On the subject of making sure it happens, while K4 remains unbroken, the cryptanalysts are making progress. For one thing, Sanborn offered a clue in 2010, revealing that the plaintext for the ciphertext section NYPVTT on K4 is BERLIN. 
 We're back to the rabbit holes. "We've asked him is that just coincidence? If you were to say something like NUMBER LINE then you would have a BER and a LIN next to each other?" says Dunin. "And he said, 'No, it's the city - it's Berlin.' And the CIA does have a lot of history with Berlin, so that's very plausible. We've looked at what are called cribs: if the word Berlin is there, what would likely be after it? What would be before it? Would it be Berlin Wall? Ahead of it, would it be West Berlin, East Berlin? We've thought of all this because we've been working on it for so long." 
 On top of that, last autumn Dunin organised a dinner in Washington DC that united, for the first time on record, Jim Sanborn and Ed Scheidt with two of the people who were on the NSA's code-breaking team back in 1992. "This is the first time that they were all in the same room," Dunin enthuses. "It was a dinner at a nice Italian restaurant, I would say total there was maybe 20 to 25 people there. We had some food and at one point, I just said, 'Okay, Ed, we have some of the people who were on that NSA team.' I pointed to them and said, 'You're in the room together. Is there anything you'd like to ask Ed?' 
 "That room, you could have heard a pin drop," she laughs. "The first reaction was, 'Well, there's nothing I can ask him that he's actually going to answer.' But a dialogue started. There were questions and some stuff Ed would answer, some he wouldn't. He'd defer to Jim Sanborn, and it was just a magnificent conversation that we're still discussing it on our discussion group. It was just an awesome occasion." 
 Finally, in 2010, Dunin filed a freedom of information request to see the NSA group's notes from the breaking of K1-K3. It turns out that producers can be very useful people when it comes to getting things done. 
 "I wanted to see their notes and I was told that I couldn't because it was classified," says Dunin. "And I disagreed with that because, why should efforts to solve a recreational cipher be classified? It took about three years of me pushing and pushing and pushing and I finally got a report which I posted online." 
 That's one victory, at least. So is Dunin feeling optimistic about cracking K4 these days? Cryptography is filled with codes that can't be broken - or parts of codes that can't be broken. 
 Dunin sighs. "Overall, yes," she offers. "I feel part four will be solved. It's interesting: there's this natural human desire to find patterns in things. We're pattern-finding beings. My firm belief, though, is that Kryptos is not necessarily going to be solved by someone who's this massive big-brained cryptanalyst, because they've already worked on it. I think it's really going to be an idea from left field that comes from a writer, or a gardener, or someone who's a cook whose parents were physicists, or a small child. 
 "Some people ask me if I want to be the one to solve Kryptos," she continues. "I just want to see it solved. I want it off my plate. If I can help towards the solution process by sharing as much information as possible, great. Absolutely fantastic. I would love to see it solved in my lifetime." 
 As for Sanborn's feelings? "Sanborn has given different answers," says Dunin. "Sometimes he says that he's just getting too much attention, it's just too crazy. He gets odd people showing up at his doorstep, and he just kind of wants it done. Like any human, he changes his mind day by day, though. Sometimes he says that even after we solve the fourth part there's still a remaining mystery solved, because he thinks that with good art, you should never understand everything that you see - otherwise it's just a waste." 
 She laughs. "And then sometimes he says he would love to die knowing it has not been solved. To which I say: well, I've got a couple of members of my group who can make that happen!" 
 
 2014-11-20 - NYT - CLOCK 
 ***Sculptor Offers Another Clue in 24-Year-Old Mystery at C.I.A.   *** 
 Kryptos, a sculpture at C.I.A. headquarters in Langley, Va., in 2010. The last of four messages embedded in Kryptos has baffled code breakers since the work  went up in 1990. The sculptor, Jim Sanborn, gave a six-letter clue (“Berlin”) in 2010, but it did not lead to a solution. So he has offered another hint, this one five letters (“Clock”). “I figured maybe I should be a little more specific,” he said.Credit ...Drew Angerer for The New York Times 
 By John Schwartz 
 Nov. 20, 2014 
 The artist who created the enigmatic Kryptos, a puzzle-in-a-sculpture that has driven code breakers to distraction since it was installed 24 years ago in a courtyard at C.I.A. headquarters in Langley, Va., has decided that it is time for a new clue. 
 By 1999, nine years after it went up, Kryptos fans had deciphered three of the sculpture’s four messages — 865 letters punched through elegantly curved copper sheets that make up the most striking part of the work. (In fact, cryptographers at the National Security Agency cracked those messages in 1993 , but kept the triumph to themselves.) The fourth and final passage, a mere 97 characters long, has thwarted thousands of followers ever since. 
 Jim Sanborn , the sculptor, having grown impatient with the progress of the fans and their incessant prodding for clues — and the misguided insistence by some that they had actually solved the puzzle — provided a six-letter clue to the puzzle in 2010. The 64th through 69th characters of the final panel, when deciphered, spelled out the word BERLIN. 
 Since then, the fans, many of whom keep up a lively online conversation, have come up empty-handed. And so Mr. Sanborn has decided to open the door a bit more with five additional letters, those in the 70th through 74th position. 
 They spell “clock.” 
 This means that the letters from positions 64 to 74 spell out two words: “Berlin clock.” 
 As it happens, there is a famous public timepiece known as the “ Berlin clock ,” a puzzle in itself that tells time through application of set theory. Its 24 lights count off the hours and minutes in rows and boxes, with hours in the top two rows and minutes in the two below. 
 When asked whether his new clue was a reference to this Berlin clock, Mr. Sanborn, sounding pleased, said, “ There are several really interesting clocks in Berlin. ” 
 He added, “ You’d better delve into that particular clock ,” a favorite of conspiracy theorists because of the mysterious death in 1991 of its designer, Dieter Binninger. With all the intriguing timekeepers in the city, including the “ Clock of Flowing Time ,” Mr. Sanborn said, “ There’s a lot of fodder there. ” 
 
 HYPERLINK "https://web.archive.org/web/20230301023506/https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2014/11/21/science/new-clue-to-kryptos.html" \h A New Clue to ‘Kryptos’ 
 The creator of Kryptos, a sculpture that contains an 865-character encrypted message, has released a second clue for the final unsolved section. 
 Divulging the clue “Berlin,” he said, led to “ a tsunami ” of entries that went off in every direction, including many “ frivolous or debasing or hostile entries ,” as well as messages from Nazi enthusiasts. 
 The crush of people claiming to have solved the final puzzle, reached through a website Mr. Sanborn set up in 2010, had grown to be such a distraction that he set up a barrier to entry. 
 Two years ago, he instituted a $50 fee (via Western Union) for anyone wanting to test a possible solution; the fee guaranteed “an exchange of no more than two back-and-forth-emails,” and no additional clues. If Mr. Sanborn did not wish to respond to the entry, he said, he would return the money. 
 “It really worked very well, ” he said. Although he has not made much money, Mr. Sanborn said that was not the idea: “It’s made it manageable.” 
 But still, no solution. So Mr. Sanborn, now 69, said, “I figured maybe I should be a little more specific.” 
 He was designing the project, he further explained, when the Berlin Wall fell, and “there’s no doubt I was influenced by all that going on simultaneously.” With the 25th anniversary of the fall of the wall, he said, he thought it was worth returning to the topic. 
 The news will undoubtedly scramble the thousands of people around the world who have tried to decrypt Mr. Sanborn’s brainchild, especially the members of a Yahoo group devoted to the sculpture. They meet every now and then in the real world with a dinner in the Washington area; Mr. Sanborn has attended, as have N.S.A. employees. 
 That community keeps up a steady stream of chatter about possible solutions, and is roughly divided between those who are called the “O.S.C.s,” for Old School Cryptographers, and “Brownies,” for devotees of the thriller author Dan Brown, who has mentioned Kryptos in his work. 
 Edward M. Scheidt, a retired chairman of the Central Intelligence Agency’s cryptographic center, worked with Mr. Sanborn to devise the cryptographic schemes he incorporated into the artwork. Mr. Scheidt, reached in Herndon, Va., at the encryption company TecSec, which he co-founded, said he would not have expected to find people still banging their heads against Kryptos so many years later. 
 “No, not really,” Mr. Scheidt said with a chuckle. “But a technique that I used obviously worked.” 
 
 2014-11-20 - Wired 
 Finally, a New Clue to Solve the CIA's Mysterious Kryptos Sculpture 
 In 1989, the year the Berlin Wall began to fall, American artist Jim Sanborn was busy working on his Kryptos sculpture, a cryptographic puzzle wrapped in a riddle that he created for the CIA’s headquarters and that has been driving amateur and professional cryptographers mad ever since. To honor the 25th anniversary of the Wall’s […] 
 IN 1989, THEyear the Berlin Wall began to fall, American artist Jim Sanborn was busy working on his Kryptos sculpture, a cryptographic puzzle wrapped in a riddle that he created for the CIA's headquarters and that has been driving amateur and professional cryptographers mad ever since. 
 To honor the 25th anniversary of the Wall's demise and the artist's 69th birthday this year, Sanborn has decided to reveal a new clue to help solve his iconic and enigmatic artwork. It's only the second hint he's released since the sculpture was unveiled in 1990 and may finally help unlock the fourth and final section of the encrypted sculpture, which frustrated sleuths have been struggling to crack for more than two decades. 
 The 12-foot-high, verdigrised copper, granite and wood sculpture on the grounds of the CIA complex in Langley, Virginia, contains four encrypted messages carved out of the metal, three of which were solved years ago. The fourth is composed of just 97 letters, but its brevity belies its strength. Even the NSA, whose master crackers were the first to decipher other parts of the work , gave up on cracking it long ago. So four years ago, concerned that he might not live to see the mystery of Kryptos resolved, Sanborn released a clue to help things along, revealing that six of the last 97 letters when decrypted spell the word "Berlin"---a revelation that many took to be a reference to the Berlin Wall. 
 To that clue today, he's adding the next word in the sequence---"clock"---that may or may not throw a wrench in this theory. Now the Kryptos sleuths just have to unscramble the remaining 86 characters to find out. 
 Is a Clock a Clock? 
 Sanborn told WIRED that he's always been fascinated by Berlin's many clocks but the Berlin Clock in particular has intrigued him the most. The clock, also known as the Berlin Uhr or Set Theory Clock, was designed in the 1970s by inventor and tinkerer Dieter Binninger . It displays the time through illuminated colored blocks rather than numbers and requires the viewer to calculate the time based on a complex scheme. 
 
 The Berlin Clock, or the Set Theory Clock. JOHN FREEMAN/LONELY PLANET IMAGES/GETTY IMAGES 
 A yellow lamp at the top of the clock blinks every two seconds while a row of red lamps beneath it represent five hours. Red lights on a second row denote one hour each, and time is calculated based on the number of lights illuminated. "So if in the first line 2 lamps are lit and in the second line 3 lamps, it's 5+5+3=13h or 1 p.m.," notes one description of the timepiece . 
 " Most people have no idea who Dieter is and all of the other people who make strange clocks in Berlin ," Sanborn says. " There's a very interesting back story to [the Berlin Clock]. " 
 The focus on the clock, however, may just be a bit of sly misdirection from Sanborn---who is known among Kryptos fans for his puckishness. 
 "Clock" could easily refer instead to a method devised by a Polish mathematician and cryptologist during World War II to crack Germany's Enigma ciphers---a method that was expanded on by Alan Turing and his team at Bletchley Park who are credited with ultimately cracking Enigma. (It may be no coincidence that Sanborn has decided to release his new clue at the same time as The Imitation Game , a film about Turing's work on Enigma, is opening in US theaters on Nov. 28.) 
 How Kryptos Has Remained Unsolved for 20 Years 
 Sanborn's Kryptos sculpture was unveiled at the CIA on Nov. 3, 1990, a month that has a recurring theme in the sculpture's ethos. 
 The artwork features a large block of petrified wood standing upright, with a tall copper plate scrolling out from the wood like a sheet of paper. At the sculpture’s base is a round pool with a fountain pump that sends water moving in a circular direction around the pool. Carved out of the copper plate are approximately 1,800 letters, some of them forming a cryptographic table based on a method developed by a 16th-century Frenchman named Blaise de Vigenere. 
 In 1995 a small group of cryptanalysts inside the NSA quietly deciphered the first three sections of the sculpture, though no one outside the agency and the CIA's top brass knew about it. In 1998, CIA analyst David Stein cracked the same three messages using paper and pencil and about 400 lunch-time hours. Only his CIA colleagues knew of his success, however, because the agency didn’t publicize it. A year later, California computer scientist Jim Gillogly gained public notoriety when he cracked the same three messages using a Pentium II. 
 The first message is a poetic phrase that Sanborn composed: “Between subtle shading and the absence of light lies the nuance of iqlusion.” 
 The second one hints at something buried: 
 “It was totally invisible. How’s that possible? They used the earth’s magnetic field. x The information was gathered and transmitted undergruund to an unknown location. x Does Langley know about this? They should: it’s buried out there somewhere. x Who knows the exact location? Only WW. This was his last message. x Thirty eight degrees fifty seven minutes six point five seconds north, seventy seven degrees eight minutes forty four seconds west. x Layer two.” 
 WW, Sanborn told WIRED in 2005, refers to William Webster, director of the CIA at the time of the sculpture's completion. Sanborn was forced to provide Webster with the solution to the puzzle to reassure the CIA that it wasn't something that would embarrass the agency. 
 The third message is a take on a passage from the diary of English Archaeologist Howard Carter describing the opening of King Tut’s tomb on Nov. 26, 1922. 
 “Slowly, desparatly slowly, the remains of passage debris that encumbered the lower part of the doorway was removed. With trembling hands I made a tiny breach in the upper left-hand corner. And then, widening the hole a little, I inserted the candle and peered in. The hot air escaping from the chamber caused the flame to flicker, but presently details of the room within emerged from the mist. x Can you see anything? q” 
 Sanborn has said that the first three sections contain clues to solving the final 97 letters but no one has figured out what those might be. After no progress cracking the last section, 
 Sanborn released the "Berlin" clue four years ago, considering it "a significant clue.” 
 “I’m throwing it out there. It just makes that many fewer characters people have to figure out ," he told WIRED at the time. 
 The six letters that spell "Berlin"---NYPVTT----are the 64th through 69th letters of the final 97 characters and the new clue "clock" are deciphered from the next five letters that follow it. 
 Code detectives worked to crack the puzzle following the Berlin revelation. Members of a popular Kryptos Yahoo Group led by Elonka Dunin, the foremost expert on Kryptos, tried for months to resolve it but to no avail. 
 Who knows if the new clue will prove to be any more helpful. And even if it is and sleuths decipher the final code, there’s an additional message they will still need to resolve. Once decrypted, the fourth section reveals a riddle, which Sanborn has said requires sleuths to be on the CIA grounds to solve. 
 The Mystery of the Riddle 
 “In part of the code that’s been deciphered, I refer to an act that took place when I was at the agency and a location that’s on the ground of the agency, ” Sanborn said during a 2005 interview with WIRED. “ So in order to find that place, you have to decipher the piece and then go to the agency and find that place. ” 
 The riddle may refer to something Sanborn buried on the CIA grounds at the time he installed the sculpture, possibly in a location spelled out in section two of the sculpture, which lists a set of latitude and longitude coordinates: 38 57 6.5 N and 77 8 44 W. Sanborn has said they refer to “locations of the agency.” 
 Dunin has suggested that the coordinates may refer to the location of a Berlin Wall monument on the CIA grounds. Three slabs from the Berlin Wall sit at the spy agency's headquarters, a gift from the German government. 
 Sanborn has also told WIRED that the collapse of the wall was " big news " at the time he was " casting about " for things he wanted to include in his sculpture. However, the wall monument wasn't dedicated at the CIA until 1992, two years after Kryptos was unveiled. Although the coordinates of the monument’s location---38 57 2.5 N, 77 8 40 W---differ from the coordinates mentioned in Kryptos by four seconds in both the latitude and longitude, Dunin has speculated that the CIA may have originally planned to position the monument at the coordinates Sanborn mentions on Kryptos but then later chose a different location. Alternatively, Sanborn may have been using an incorrect U.S. geological map when he created his sculpture and thus got the coordinates wrong, she notes. After all, Sanborn has other errors in his sculpture, both intentional and unintentional. 
 Kryptos includes intentional spelling errors and misaligned characters set higher on a line of text than characters around them. But in 2006, Sanborn realized he had also made an inadvertent error, a missing “x” that he mistakenly deleted from the end of a line in section two, a section that was already solved. He discovered the omission while doing a letter-by-letter comparison of the plaintext and coded text in preparation for a book about his work. 
 The “x” was supposed to signify a period or section-break at the end of a phrase. Sanborn removed it for aesthetic reasons, thinking it wouldn’t affect the way the puzzle was deciphered, but in fact it did. What sleuths had until then deciphered to say “ID by rows” was actually supposed to say “layer two.” The correction hasn’t helped anyone solve the rest of the puzzle, however, in the subsequent years. 
 Now this second clue, Sanborn hopes, will reinvigorate efforts to crack the mystery, though he has mixed views on whether he wants the journey to end. The artist has said he'd like to see Kryptos solved in his lifetime, but he also enjoys that some of the smartest minds in cryptography---including those at the CIA and NSA---continue to be baffled by his work. 
 Only two other people, aside from Sanborn, were initially said to know the solution to Kryptos: one was the retired chairman of the CIA’s Cryptographic Center Ed Scheidt, who helped Sanborn choose and alter the coding techniques for the sculpture. The other was William Webster, the CIA director who received a sealed envelope containing the solution at the sculpture’s dedication. However, in 2005 Sanborn revealed to WIRED that Scheidt and Webster only *thought *they knew the solution. In fact, he had deceived them. 
 In November 1989, after the East German government announced that its citizens were free from then on to cross over the Wall into West Berlin and West Germany, crowds of euphoric Germans began chipping away at the cement barrier. With this new clue provided by Sanborn, let the chipping away on Kryptos begin. 
 
 2019-03-01 - Elonka 
 Notes from Day 1 at Langley 
 Security is tight tight tight. Multiple layers of review to enter, then driving through multiple gates. 
 Exciting to walk through the Main Entrance across the CIA compass rose, I didn't get to do that last time. 
 Sobering to see the Memorial Walls. 
 Escorted in by multiple people, and had some interesting chats with members of the Media Relations and Public Affairs departments, they were eager to talk about Kryptos. We spoke briefly about "the envelope" and where it might be now. CIA lore is that it was in the Director's office. Though I've also heard that Webster gave it to Peter Earnest, who later became the founding executive director of the International Spy Museum. I heard today that Mr. Earnest was in the process of retiring, or at least stepping down from that Board. 
 I spent nearly an hour in the gift shop, spending waaaay too much money, but then again, I'm not regretting a penny of it! 
 On our tour of the building we passed a row of portraits of CIA directors, including William Webster. On my brief glance as we walked by I didn't notice anything unusual, though I would like to go back and take a closer look. 
 The museum was interesting, I could spend much more time there! They had silken OTPs, a make-up box with an encrypted mirror, and lots of other intriguing items. 
 The high point of the day for me was as we were walking past the cafeteria, and I knew I was getting closer to seeing Kryptos again! 
 We came in from the far end of the courtyard on this cold cold day. The first thing I noticed was that there's a new concrete plaza in the semi-circle that Sanborn designed.  The plaza doesn't go as far as the duck pond, nothing of that part of the sculpture was disturbed. There were two walkways leading to the new plaza, one from the far side, and another perpendicular, that led from near the K2 coordinates point. 
 Near the coords I saw a roughly benchmark-sized disk. No markings, but a large slot in it like for turning. On further investigation, there were several of these disks placed each 15' or so around the circumference of the grassy area. I'm not sure what they're for. 
 Approaching the duck pond area, I was excited to see that the pond is drained for the winter. I looked closely but saw nothing inside of interest, just the normal pump/filtration items. There were some extra rocks here and there which seemed to be placed to hide the pump lines. If I looked at it with the eyes of a geocacher, I spotted several potential (but unlikely) hiding spots for a cache, we'll see if I can examine more closely tomorrow. 
 Approaching Kryptos, the first thing I noticed was that the white rock is no longer white, it is now a distinct tinge of green. 
 The round pool, as with the duck pond, is also drained. I saw nothing of interest inside. 
 All of the letters on Kryptos seemed to be in their correct locations.  :) 
 The weather was overcast, so there was nothing light- or shadow-related to be observed. 
 I didn't get a chance to go outside the New Headquarters Building to see the Morse pieces or whether the unmarked slab is still visible. That will be tomorrow! 
 The biggest disappointment of the day was hearing that I won't be able to bring in a GPS tomorrow, so I will have to get creative to identify the exact location of the K2 coordinates.  From eyeballing it on Google Maps, it looks like I can triangulate from two known points. For example, from Kryptos (the petrified log), on my first measure I get a distance of 177.6'.  From the edge of the new walkway, I get 41.87'.  If anyone has different numbers, or knows a better way to triangulate this, please let me know ASAP, as I will have to leave my phone in the car so will not have access to email after 0845. 
 I will head back for Day 2 tomorrow, plans are for the crew to interview Ed Scheidt, and then getting some footage of me walking around and exploring/measuring the various pieces.  Then we go to a different location for another interview in the afternoon.  The next day, Sunday, we all meet at Sanborn's studio for more Kryptos conversation. 
 Will post more as I know it! 
 Elonka  :) 
 
 2019-03-02 - Elonka 
 Day 2 at Langley 
 I took another look around the K2 coords location, but again, saw nothing unusual. I also had the opportunity to more closely examine the sandstone benches, and even got down on the ground and examined them from underneath, but saw nothing unusual. 
 Along with seeing Kryptos (similar observations to yesterday), I went out to see the NHB Front Entrance pieces. My first reaction was how much bigger the compass rose was from what I'd expected. For some reason I'd pictured it as being a foot in diameter. Instead it was more like 2+ feet in diameter. 
 I was also surprised at the size of the "unmarked slab", and that it was three-dimensional, not just one slab set into the grass, but at a slant as the other pieces were. It was about 5' in length, and about 20' away from the other pieces. It had no other unusual markings that I could see. 
 There were no other slabs than the three sections we know about. I was especially looking carefully in the flower gardens (since it was winter and therefore easy to look through them). I saw nothing noteworthy, no extra lodestone, no rocks of any kind. 
 Up close, the unmarked piece looked even more like an arrow. I followed the line as far as I could, but saw nothing Kryptos-related. The line goes past a K-9 area, a place for washing dogs. There's also a tree there with a memorial plaque, that has neither a name nor a date (will post details on it later). It wasn't tarnished, so didn't look like something that had been there for 30 years. The tree was also fairly young. 
 I spent quite a bit of time looking for anything that looked like a copper disk or a USGS marker. I looked up and down the walkway, then up against the building, on both sides of the walkway. I went as far as I could in both directions, but eventually there is a steep hill on either side. 
 I confirmed that the lodestone was indeed magnetic by holding my visitor badge up to it. The lodestone was large, maybe bowling-ball size. I examined closely to see if there was there was any additional morse underneath it but did not see anything. 
 Took lots of pics, over 1,000, in prep for a 3D model. I hope it's enough! Once I have time to catch my breath, I'll figure out a good way to share them. 
 Will post more later! 
 Elonka  :) 
 
 2019-03-03 - Elonka 
 Day 3 - Kryptos weekend 
 Lots to report! 
 Several of us did the 2-hour drive down to Piney Point for an afternoon with the CNN crew. 
 Attendees: Jim Sanborn Ed Scheidt Jae Ko Elonka Dunin Drew Beebe (producer) Jon O'Beirne (producer / cameraman) Andy Lampard (cinematographer / cameraman) Dennis "Denny" McDaniels, retired NSA (from 1992 team) Bob Mang Carl Ellis Richard Santa Coloma Mike Godwin 
 Jim's studio was full of all sorts of goodies. Various shapes and sizes of Kryptos miniatures, plus samples of artwork from all other parts of his career: Atomic Time, Covert Obsolescence, projected light photographs, and his newest work about the black market sculpture trade in Cambodia. 
 We plied everyone with sushi and munchies and chatted for hours while the crew filmed away, then they kicked most of out so they could do about 45 minutes just with Jim, then they spent more time getting various shots, such as one of the cameramen went outside to get a shot through the windows of Jim looking at some of his crypto (Cyrillic) matrices. 
 We did a lot of Kryptos Q&A, here are the high points: 
 * When asked about the out-of-alignment letters and whether they had anything to do with K4, Jim kind of glanced at Ed and asked/considered whether it was time, and then told us that no, those letters were intended to refer to "1-2-3". That they'd been commonly perceived as misaligned, but their intent was actually much more subtle than that. 
 * When asked whether it was necessary to know the solutions to 1-3 in order to solve 4, Jim said no. 
 * Jim referred often to the fact that he had done the encryption on his drive back across the country, that it hadn't been fun. While he was talking, I noticed his body language, he would glance down next to him as though remembering seeing the text on the seat next to him. He said that for 1-3 he had used matrices which had to be turned, like "right-right". He didn't quite say that he'd used matrices for K4, but used verbs such as turn and flip, and that he had put it "through the washing machine". 
 * We asked him if he'd be willing to go off with Ed and just run through K4 as a test, and he said no. When I asked him if he would be able to describe K4's method to Ed, Jim said he didn't know. 
 * Jim said he's going to offer another clue in 2019, "a year ahead of schedule" and that this would be "the last one". 
 * When asked about his favorite Berlin clock, he said he likes "both Berlin clocks". He emphasized the word "both". 
 * When asked about the solutions that have been sent to him, and whether any of them were close, Jim said he got one from Germany about a year ago that was "kind of scary", that the first part had started to look right, but then the rest didn't. 
 Other notes: 
 Jim made it clear that encrypting Kryptos was something he did decades ago, and he's done his best to actively forget it. Forget the plaintext, forget the methods. 
 He also made it clear that he didn't like math, it was "anathema", he called himself something like a "math-anathema", but I don't remember exactly. 
 When he's told that Kryptos is in people's Algebra textbooks, he finds it funny. Especially when it's near the algorithm sections. That he absolutely is not a cryptanalyst. When people write to him and ask him this question or that question about different techniques, he's just lost. He knew how to make a code, but not how to take them apart, so it's never any good for us to ask him those kinds of questions. 
 Some of Jim's answers were not consistent with things he's said in the past. For example, in one of my first conversations with him many years ago I asked him about the Q in "iqlusion", and he said that it was deliberate, but it's not what it was that was important, it was the orientation or positioning. Today though he said that it was probably an error, that when he compared his two matrices, he saw a Q on one but not on the other. He also admitted the error in K2. But he did refer today to other "deliberate" errors. The topic clearly made him uncomfortable, like he was embarrassed to make a mistake, and he even started to get rattled and confused about whether "ID by Rows" or "Layer Two" was the correct plaintext, so I didn't want to push it too hard. 
 When asked whether it's necessary to know anything about the Kryptos surroundings to solve K4, Jim said that surroundings would of course change, so it would have been kind of dumb (silly?) to do that. 
 If he does have someone send him the correct answer, his first call will be to John Schwartz at the New York Times. 
 It's not necessary to have a particular book to solve K4, just "to be able to read". 
 Around the time that he was creating Kryptos, Jim was reading a Tom Robbins novel, "Still Life with Woodpecker", one of Jim's favorites. (note from Elonka: isn't there a hidden message on a pack of Camels in the book, which comes out to "CHOICE"?  Which of course may or may not be related to K4) 
 The front entrance pieces with the Morse code messages were meant, artistically, to represent that stone strata with messages had been there before the CIA, and we were seeing them as stone outcroppings. And that as we got deeper and deeper into CIA, the messages were intended to become more and more complex. 
 When asked about Star Trek (TNG started in the late 1980s), Jim said he has watched the show, but he doesn't remember episode names so couldn't say what his favorite was. 
 We spent quite a bit of time asking Jim about the correlation between the plaintext BERLIN and the ciphertext such as NYPVTT. Specifically, we were trying to find out if there was a 1:1 relationship from NYPVTT to BERLIN, or there was some other step, the masking technique. Jim was confused when we mentioned masking technique, evidently it's something that Ed said that Jim didn't understand. Jim said that yes the ciphertext and plaintext were connected, but when I tried to explain what exactly we were asking, like that in K1 EMUFPH is exactly BETWEE, but in K3 ENDYAH does not map exactly to SLOWLY, Jim backed off and said he would only commit to the fact that K4 is exactly 97 characters long, and that BERLIN is plaintext that starts at exactly the 64th character, but he wouldn't go further than that. 
 Jim spoke a bit about the people who are writing to him via jimsanborn.net , with $50 and a request for correspondence. He says he gets one person writing to him every week, at the same time, with a potential solution, that it's basically the same but shifts one letter each time! 
 Some other bits and pieces I learned about Ed Scheidt, from his 30-odd years in the CIA. 
 In his early years he was stationed in Laos, "seeing the countryside" meaning that he was out in the fields as a communications officer. 
 He was in Syria during the war in 1967, and was the last one out, the one who "closed the vault". 
 He was also in the Philippines. Sadly, that was where his first wife died, in Manila in childbirth. 
 He was never in Cambodia. 
 Ed's 2nd (current) wife, Mary-Jane, was executive assistant to CIA Directors such as George Tenet (who was Director from 1996-2004). Next time I see her, I'll have to ask if she ever saw anything Kryptos-related in the office! 
 As for the documentary crew, they've got hours of footage now. From this point they'll edit it down to a short piece, probably about five minutes long, which will eventually be available at greatbigstory.com . I'll be staying in touch with them, and will of course let you know if/when I get transcripts of the interviews, and additional Kryptos pictures/videos. 
 And now, I sleep! 
 Elonka  :) 
 
 2019-07-08 - Great Big Story 
 [Narrator] This is a story about a puzzle called Kryptos and one woman who's spent almost two decades trying to solve it. 
 In the heart of the CIA headquarters lies a mystery. OK, probably more than one mystery, but, this one is weird because it's meant to be solved. 
 It's a sculpture containing an encoded message that's a challenge to the CIA employees; but, for 30 years, no one has been able to figure out what it says. If anyone's got a shot, it's Elonka Dunin. I mean, just listen to her. 
 When my friends and family ask me what I want for Christmas, I tell them to get several puzzles, mix all the pieces together and then, just give me a bag of pieces. I enjoy seeing order come out of chaos. 
 [Narrator] When Elonka's not solving jigsaw puzzles, she's cracking codes and she's good at it. 
 The Da Vinci Code's author even named a character after her, Nola Kaye. 
 I mean, it's an anagram, but, you know, that's the kind of thing puzzle people do. One day, Elonka ran into a code that finally stumped her. 
 - I first heard about Kryptos, I think, in late 2000. It is about 12 feet tall and 20 feet long. It has thousands of characters carved into it. Kryptos has four codes in it. Three of the four have been solved. The fourth has not been solved and it is considered to be one of the most famous unsolved codes of the world. Here we are going on 30 years, and it still hasn't been cracked. 
 Elonka and cryptanalysts around the world have tried every technique in the book, polyalphabetic substitution, transposition, Playfair, binary, Morse, but, the fourth code only 97 characters long, it doesn't give an inch. It just sits there, right in front of us, unsolved. 
 So, it raises a question of why. Why is it that this artist, Jim Sanborn, who had never created a code before in his entire life, how could he have designed something that has stumped the entire code breaking world? 
 [Narrator] Welcome to the island of Jim Sanborn. He is the artist who made Kryptos, and he's the only person on Earth who knows the solution. 
 - The code itself is in a safe deposit box that's pretty much where it stays. 
 In the late 1980s the CIA was required that they have a sculpture. I was ultimately selected to do the work on the exterior of the building. So, I chose to do a piece using encoded text. Through this copper screen, I cut with jigsaws, by hand, almost 2,000 letters and people have been contacting me continuously, daily, for 30 years about it. 
 [Elonka] We have sushi, we have drinks, we have chips. 
 - [Jim] There is actually a Kryptos group, that meets every year or so, to do everything humanly possible to get me to give them a clue to Kryptos. 
 - [Elonka] Our Kryptos community is made up of people all around the world. We have thousands of people that are interested in Kryptos and either cracking it or helping to see it cracked. 
 Some of them are professional code breakers, some of them are students, often someone will just come in and toss out an idea and then, there will be some brainstorming. 
 The topography has changed. Has anything changed in terms of the solutions of Kryptos because of the changes? - That's a, it's a trap question. 
 Good (laugh). 
 - [Elonka] Often it's just a case of everyone just wants to listen to every single thing that Jim might say about Kryptos because there's that hope that he will drop that clue, that little hint that will help. 
 So, if one invested a lot of time in the environment around Kryptos that would be kind of silly. 
 I still have to be very vigilant and extremely poker faced when everybody wants to know what it says, but, I've gotten after 30 years, fairly good at making it so that I don't flinch or offer them a tell. 
 And so far, so good. 
 [Narrator] It's been 30 years since Kryptos was unveiled at the CIA and still people are working to crack that forth code, every single day. 
 - I think every artwork strives to hold your attention for as long as possible, but, if it's an artwork that contains something that keeps your attention for even 10 minutes, much less 30 years, I get a great sense of satisfaction from that. It's become part of a many, many people's lives, and I think that's the most important part. 
 - [Elonka] People have asked me if I want to be the one that solves Kryptos, and it doesn't have to be me. I want to see it solved, and if I can help by sharing as much information as I know, that's as good to me as having actually cracked the code. If I had to place a bet, Kryptos, yes, Kryptos will be solved. I couldn't tell you when, but, it's a real code; it's a real cipher; it's solvable. 
 
 2020-01-29 - NYT - NORTHEAST 
 This Sculpture Holds a Decades-Old C.I.A. Mystery. And Now, Another Clue. 
 By John Schwartz and Jonathan Corum Jan. 29, 2020 
 The creator of one of the world’s most famous mysteries is giving obsessive fans a new clue. 
 Kryptos, a sculpture in a courtyard at the headquarters of the Central Intelligence Agency in Langley, Va., holds an encrypted message that has not fully yielded to attempts to crack it. It’s been nearly 30 years since its tall scroll of copper with thousands of punched-through letters was set in place. 
 Three of the four passages of the sculpture have been decrypted (the first, though unacknowledged at the time, was solved by a team from the National Security Agency ). But after nearly three decades, one brief passage remains uncracked. And that has been a source of delight and consternation to thousands of people around the world . 
 Kryptos.Courtesy of Jim Sanborn 
 The sculptor, Jim Sanborn, has been hounded for decades by codebreaking enthusiasts. And he has twice provided clues to move the community of would-be solvers along, once in 2010 and again in 2014 . 
 Now he is offering another clue. The last one, he says. 
 It is a word: “ NORTHEAST .” (More on that later.) 
 Why do people care so much about a puzzle cut into a sheet of copper in a courtyard after so much time? It’s not just that the piece itself has a kind of brooding, powerful beauty, or the fact that it has been referred to in novels by the thriller writer Dan Brown. It is something deeper, something that involves the nature of the human mind, said Craig Bauer, a professor of mathematics at York College of Pennsylvania and a former scholar in residence at the N.S.A.’s Center for Cryptologic History. 
 “We have many problems that are difficult to resolve — intimidating, perhaps even scary,” he said. “It gives people great pleasure to pick up on one that they think they have a chance of solving.” 
 Three Deciphered Passages 
 The message of Kryptos, and a partial guide to its solution, is contained in the panels of the sculpture. Mr. Sanborn devised the codes that he used for the passages with the help of Edward Scheidt, a retired chairman of the C.I.A.’s cryptographic center. The passages follow a theme of concealment and discovery, each more difficult to decipher than the last. The first reads: “BETWEEN SUBTLE SHADING AND THE ABSENCE OF LIGHT LIES THE NUANCE OF IQLUSION.” (The misspelling was intentional, Mr. Sanborn has said, to make it more difficult to decode — or, as he put it, “to mix it up.”) 
 The second includes the location of C.I.A. headquarters by latitude and longitude, and asks: “DOES LANGLEY KNOW ABOUT THIS? THEY SHOULD: IT’S BURIED OUT THERE SOMEWHERE. X WHO KNOWS THE EXACT LOCATION? ONLY WW.” The “W.W." is a reference to William Webster, who headed the C.I.A. when the sculpture was unveiled . Mr. Sanborn provided him with a key for deciphering the messages. 
 Mr. Webster, who left the C.I.A. in 1991 , declined a request for an interview. 
 The third passage paraphrases, again with a bit of misspelling, the account by the Egyptologist Howard Carter of opening King Tut’s tomb: 
 With spacing and punctuation added, the text reads: “SLOWLY, DESPARATLY SLOWLY, THE REMAINS OF PASSAGE DEBRIS THAT ENCUMBERED THE LOWER PART OF THE DOORWAY WAS REMOVED. WITH TREMBLING HANDS I MADE A TINY BREACH IN THE UPPER LEFT-HAND CORNER. AND THEN, WIDENING THE HOLE A LITTLE, I INSERTED THE CANDLE AND PEERED IN. THE HOT AIR ESCAPING FROM THE CHAMBER CAUSED THE FLAME TO FLICKER, BUT PRESENTLY DETAILS OF THE ROOM WITHIN EMERGED FROM THE MIST. X CAN YOU SEE ANYTHING? Q” 
 The Final Clue 
 The fourth section is shorter than the others, it’s just 97 characters, a fact that “ could, in itself, present a decryption challenge, ” Mr. Scheidt said in an exchange of emails. Common solution methods rely on the frequency of the most common letters, like E, T, A, O, Iand N. In addition, he said, the last passage uses what is known as a masking technique, a further level of obfuscation. 
 The clues Mr. Sanborn has offered so far are in the form of a “crib,” which is a word or phrase that appears in the decrypted text. The 2010 clue was the word BERLIN, in the 64th through 69th positions of that final passage. In 2014 he revealed the word CLOCKin the next five, 70 through 74. 
 While the response was a frenzy of activity among enthusiasts, the result, in cryptographic terms, was bupkis. 
 So now, Mr. Sanborn, at 74, is giving the world another shot: the word NORTHEAST, at positions 26 through 34. Will it be enough? 
 Why Now? 
 Did we mention Mr. Sanborn is 74? 
 Holding on to one of the world’s most enticing secrets can be stressful. Some would-be codebreakers have appeared at his home. 
 Many felt they had solved the puzzle, and wanted to check with Mr. Sanborn. Sometimes forcefully. Sometimes, in person. 
 Elonka Dunin, a game developer and consultant who has created a rich page of background information on the sculpture and oversees the best known online community of thousands of Kryptos fans , said that some who contact her (sometimes also at home) are obsessive and appear to have tipped into mental illness. “ I am always gentle to them and do my best to listen to them, ” she said. 
 Mr. Sanborn has set up systems to allow people to check their proposed solutions without having to contact him directly. The most recent incarnation is an email-based process with a fee of $50 to submit a potential solution. He receives regular inquiries, so far none of them successful. 
 The ongoing process is exhausting, he said, adding “ It’s not something I thought I would be doing 30 years on .” 
 Kryptos, which includes petrified wood, a swirling pool and slabs of granite, at C.I.A. headquarters.Courtesy of Jim Sanborn 
 But time is passing. And while he makes no claims to mathematical accomplishment, he can do basic arithmetic. “ For the past few years I have been trying to figure out how to have this ‘system’ survive my death, ” Mr. Sanborn said, “ and it has not been easy .” 
 He has decided that if the code is not broken when he dies, the secret will be put up for auction. He might even do it in his lifetime. “I do realize that the value of Kryptos is unknown and that perhaps this concept will bear little fruit,” he said. The buyer could reveal the secret or perpetuate the mystery and maintain the system for submissions. 
 The money raised, he said, would go to funding climate science. Why that particular cause? “Seemed like a no brainer to me,” he said. “We live on an island!” The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration has found that the Chesapeake Bay, where he lives, has some of the worst relative sea level rise in the country, at 3.4 millimeters a year, or about twice the global rate . 
 If you would like to try to solve Kryptos yourself, start with Ms. Dunin’s encyclopedic site and read the work of Kim Zetter at Wired . Dr. Bauer goes into a detailed description of how the first three passages were decrypted in his book, “ Unsolved!: The History and Mystery of the World’s Greatest Ciphers .” And *this earlier article might * help, too. 
 Ms. Dunin suggested that the fourth passage could turn out to be unsolvable; “Maybe he did something really weird,” she said. 
 But still, these several additional letters might be enough for the current community of Kryptos fans, or some gifted newcomer, to tease out the plain text of that final passage. 
 And it will not be the end of the mysteries of Kryptos: The full text contains a riddle. 
 Dr. Bauer put it this way: “There will be yet another mystery that the four passages together have a meaning that’s greater than their individual pieces and there’s something more to figure out.” The sculpture is more than its copper scroll; there are scraps of Morse code scattered through elements around the piece, as well as a pillar of petrified wood, a swirling pool, slabs of granite and more. The full mystery of Kryptos could involve the broader assemblage of pieces and their relationships to each other. 
 “This,” Dr. Bauer said, “is the sculpture that keeps on giving.” 
 
 2020-01-30 - NYT 
 How I Got the Latest Clue to a 30-Year-Old Puzzle at the C.I.A. 
 Jim Sanborn, an artist who created Kryptos, a cryptographic puzzle that has stumped enthusiasts for three decades, emailed me this month with a hint. 
 https://web.archive.org/web/20211104055539/https://www.nytimes.com/by/john-schwartz 
 By John Schwartz 
 Jan. 30, 2020 
 Times Inside r explains who we are and what we do, and delivers behind-the-scenes insights into how our journalism comes together. 
 The email arrived on Jan. 2. Three words: “ Are you ready? ” 
 I was. 
 The email was from Jim Sanborn, a sculptor whose work I have written about for more than 20 years. 
 Some names show up in your inbox and it feels as if you’ve gotten a jolt. That’s how I feel whenever I hear from Jim. I’m not an art critic. But I have written about computer security and encryption at various stages of my career, and Mr. Sanborn created a cryptographic puzzle that has stumped enthusiasts for decades. It is a sculpture at C.I.A. headquarters in Langley, Va., called Kryptos. (The name, from the Greek, means “hidden.”) 
 The sculpture, which contains four encoded passages cut into a tall sheet of wave-shaped copper, has been an obsession for thousands of people around the world. I’ve had a relationship of sorts with this work of art since I first wrote about it in 1999 , when I was a tech reporter for The Washington Post. I joined The Times as a reporter in 2000, and these days I cover climate. 
 The first time I wrote about Kryptos, I reported that two people had said they had solved the mysteries of the first three encoded passages. (Later, the National Security Agency would reveal that its employees had cracked the code somewhat earlier , but didn’t announce it because the N.S.A. doesn’t talk about anything.) 
 For my Post article, I visited C.I.A. headquarters and saw the moving, oddly powerful work, which sits in a courtyard near the cafeteria in an area not open to the public. (I stopped in the gift shop on my way out, and bought a C.I.A. T-shirt. How could I not? But it turned out to be scratchy, so I don’t wear it.) 
 In 1999, when I first reported on Kryptos, it seemed that with three of the passages from the sculpture decoded, the fourth would be cracked pretty quickly. 
 Ha. 
 Twenty years later, and 30 years after the sculpture first appeared at C.I.A. headquarters, the secret of those last 97 characters remains as solid as the log of petrified wood that makes up part of the work. 
 Over time, Mr. Sanborn has tried to provide clues that could move people along, since he has been hounded by people who believe, mistakenly, that they have cracked the last passage, known as K4. He was getting 200 inquiries a week, he told me, which “became overwhelming and some became threatening and even, believe it or not, racist.” For $50, people could submit a proposed solution and get an answer, which “made things much more manageable,” he said. 
 He provided a clue to me in 2010 that we published in The New York Times. And again in 2014 . And now. 
 He called me in late 2019 to suggest he might be about to release another clue, to move things along. At a recent gathering of Kryptos fans, he had said he wanted me to take it on. I said yes, of course. 
 I love Mr. Sanborn’s work. When I stumbled upon one of his unmistakable pieces on the campus of the University of Iowa, a metal cylinder with punched-through letters in many languages that is lit from within at night, casting text on the courtyard and walls around it, it seemed so instantly familiar that I felt as if I were encountering an old friend in a strange town. 
 But Kryptos, his decades-old piece, has become something of a millstone for him, he said. “ My cryptography interest left me 25 years ago, ” he told me as I was finishing the latest article. “ My art went in different directions. ” That’s an understatement. While he has produced other cryptographic pieces, he has also produced astonishing installations that straddle art and science , and, most recently, “ Without Provenance: The Making of Contemporary Antiquity ,” a collection of objects that explores the nature of looted antiquities and forgery in unsettling ways. 
 Perhaps the most interesting part of my call from Mr. Sanborn is his decision to arrange an auction to sell the solution to the mystery, whether after his death or before. If the amount of money raised is substantial — and this, he admits, is unknown — it will go to support climate science. He lives on an island in the Chesapeake Bay, so as he told me, it was a “no-brainer.” Coincidentally, this put the Kryptos news within my current beat. 
 As I worked on the story about the final clue , my editor, Hannah Fairfield, liked the graphics possibilities of portraying the coded and decoded passages; Jonathan Corum, the amazing science graphics editor, agreed to do his magic. And you can see the result. 
 Much of the time, journalism is jack rabbit quick, with the need to leap when news breaks. 
 Sometimes it’s slow, and things can percolate. And sometimes it even helps us solve a puzzle. 
 
 2020-10-1 - AJ Jacobs 
 Approx Date 
 THE STORY OF THE NEW CLUE 
 Jim said: “Just recently, I gave out a surreptitious new clue that I didn't tell anybody about, but I'm sure you know about that. I kind of gave it out as a pandemic bonus just to keep people busy out there. I was surprised. I first leaked it to one guy in the Outback of Australia and somebody else in South Asia. But it took months, it took four months for that to come out, to, to reach the KRYPTOS community. 
 
 And I had debated that layout. I had debated quite a while, whether I was going to release Northeast or East Northeast , and I decided to just release Northeast first. I made the layout the same time for the two, and then I released the first one and then I released the second ones, you know, just as a surreptitious kind of thing.” 
 I said, “There are theories out there that ‘East’ is just part of the word that it's really like least or beast or yeast. Maybe it's a recipe.” 
 Jim replied: “Well, that's great. I mean, whatever, whatever comes out of it, that's great, but it is an ever-decreasing thing to crack. And I also figured that the more spaces I've filled in and there will not be any more clues, but the more spaces I've filled in, the more inclined people will be to guess. To guess a string of characters is, is totally impossible, but to guess a shorter string, like before East and then center section, the people could guess those parts of it.” 
 I said, “But that is it. No more clues. That’s the end.” 
 Jim said: “Right.” 
 THE CARVING OF THE LETTERS 
 Jim said he initially wanted to cut out the letters on the screen with a water jet. But the water jet company was charging too much money. “So, basically, I went through, I think, fifteen different assistants, nine hundred jigsaw blades and twelve Bosch jigsaws and cut it by hand over two and a half years.” 
 I said, “My heart goes out to the fifteen assistants.” 
 Jim said, “One guy was just out of drug rehab, and for some reason he found peace cutting the letters out. So he did a huge amount of it all by himself.” 
 WHAT HAS CHANGED ABOUT KRYPTOS SINCE IT WAS INSTALLED 
 Jim said his last visit to KRYPTOS was probably 12 years ago. 
 I asked him if anything had changed. He said, “Only that there were tree frogs living in the petrified tree.” 
 I said, “Are the frogs part of the code?” 
 He chuckled and said, “Well, I wouldn’t tell you if they were.” 
 THE LENGTH OF TIME TO CRACK K1 THROUGH K3 (NOT K4) 
 Jim: “Well, the reality is, it took a lot longer for it to come out than I expected. I mean, the first three, I figure it’d be cracked within weeks.” 
 DOES HE WANT K4 CRACKED? 
 Jim said, “Honestly, I had really hoped K4 would take this long or never be cracked. But the first three, I thought would be done quickly.” 
 I asked, in his ideal scenario, would he want K4 cracked 
 Jim: “Oh, I could care less if it’s cracked. I mean, I really don’t want, I would rather it, you know, outlive me.” 
 I asked him why then he's given out clues. 
 Jim said, “to allow it to keep simmering.” 
 THE POSSIBILITY OF BURIED TREASURE 
 I said that the plaintext of K2 mentions that it’s “buried out there.” Which makes me think that something might be buried on the grounds of the CIA. So when I visit the CIA, should I bring a shovel? 
 Jim said: “I can’t respond to any questions about what may or may not be or happened or whatever.” 
 CREATING THE CODE 
 I asked him about his meetings with Ed Scheidt. I said that I’ve read that they never talked on the phone, but would meet in secret. 
 Jim said, “At the time there was a little restaurant a few miles from the agency and we'd have lunch there, off in the corner talking in very hushed tones….I asked them to give me a history of codes more or less, you know, nobody had really written too much about it at the time. We did exchange some, some written material about the history of codes and I came up with a system based on the materials that he had given me and suggestions from him. You could do this, you can do that. You can do this, you can do that. There are codes that depend entirely on patterns. There are pattern codes that are woven into blankets in some countries in Africa in particular. I mean, so codes can come in many different shapes and sizes. So basically I was able to take that information and come up with codes and then I asked him what, you know, what could I use for the final section that would make it difficult there, you know, making it as difficult as possible, whatever. And he gave me a few, again, a few suggestions, all of which I could then modify myself into something that he wouldn't, he would have to have, he personally would then have to, take, go to great effort to find out what it said. But basically he doesn't know, he still doesn't know what it says. I used that information [the information on codes that Ed Scheidt told him] and manipulated it the way that I could in order to come up with all of the codes.” 
 WILL THE FINAL ANSWER TO K4 BE ANTICLIMACTIC IF IT’S NOT SOMETHING MOMENTOUS, LIKE THE SECRET TO LIFE? 
 Jim said, “Well, I have alluded to this many times, is once you decipher the plain text, once you have the text that doesn't necessarily mean you know what is going to happen. I mean, it's, it's something that at least you could call it a riddle, but it's not, it doesn't, it isn't like clarity, this moment of clarity, about what I've said.” 
 I said, “You described it as a riddle within a riddle.” 
 Jim said, “Yeah, that's right.” 
 WHAT ARE SOME WRONG GUESSES 
 Jim said he has received documents as much as 150 pages long with wrong guesses. I asked him for examples of wrong guesses. He said there was a “very elaborate scheme of KRYPTOS overlaying a satellite image of the CIA and somehow it made a guitar in the strings and neck of which extended to England.” 
 MISTAKES 
 I said that it seemed to me that some mistakes in the coded text were intentional and some by mistake. 
 He said, yes. There were mistakes he didn’t mean to make. “There was nobody I could ask to proofread KRYPTOS. All I could do is read it over and over and over again. And you know how that works.” 
 HOW IT FEELS TO HAVE CREATED KRYPTOS 
 Jim said, “I do derive some satisfaction from having something like this, um, that's lasted so long, but frankly, the greatest satisfaction I get is that I have created an artwork which keeps on giving which is very difficult to do.” 
 CAN K4 BE CRACKED WITH A COMPUTER? 
 Jim said, “Sure. It’s possible. I’m sure it’s possible with nano computing.” 
 I asked if I should try to get a nano computer. 
 Jim said, “Well, I think it can be cracked. I think it ultimately could be cracked by, you know, it’s possible, who knows? But I mean, it could be done with pencil and paper. But it’s, just, you know, the more powerful computers become, the more easily codes are cracked.” 
 ASIDE FROM JIM HIMSELF, WHO KNOWS THE ENTIRE ANSWER TO KRYPTOS? 
 I said, “I know that William Webster, the former head of the CIA, you did tell him the answer, you gave him an envelope, but did you give him all the answers or is there some mystery that only you know?” 
 Jim said: “Well, let's just say that the agency is not all about complete, uh, honesty. They don't like to expose anything in toto. And neither do I. I kind of played their game. For example, if I gave Webster the code and he opened it and told everybody what it was, then it doesn't bode well for the agency being able to keep a secret. Now, if he kept it secret and somebody leaked it, that doesn't look good for the agency either. So it doesn't matter whether I gave it all to him or not, because they basically don't look good if it gets out.” 
 AJ: “I read another story, uh, that I don't know how true it is. Something about a meeting at the Department of Historical Intelligence where two women got part of it and, and they got very emotional. The stress was too much for them. Did I get that right? Or is that just KRYPTOS lore?” 
 Jim: “I've told the story before. You've got most of it. I’m quite honest about this and I'm not making anything up when I tell you what that scenario was. I've already divulged a good bit of it anyway. So yeah, they, they, they didn't know what to do. They felt like they had to know what it said. There's an obvious reason, someone at the CIA had to know what was in it. I was going to put some pornography in there? Was I gonna say something anti-CIA? Was I going to do this? Was I going to do that? So, I understood that they needed to know what it said, but I interpreted that as meaning, well, they might need to know what it says, but they don't need to know what it says collectively. They don't need to know what the whole thing says. So I told them that I would give the text to the Department of Historical Intelligence and their office is in the middle of the agency in a small room, that's in the heart of the old building, which actually has a big graphic of the city of Moscow on the wall. And there's a little door, there's one single door into this small room. 
 And I asked how many people are there and they said three people, I believe they told me. So I took the plain text of, I took the plain text of KRYPTOS and I made two packages. I made one package, which was for three people and I made one package, which was for two people. A package, by a package, I mean, I divided, I cut up the plain text into pieces. 
 I gave a certain set of sentences to one individual, if there were two. And then the rest of the set to the other person. And they were mixed up, they weren't in order. And I did that for three people. So basically, I went into the room and I asked ‘Do any of you have an institutional or a photographic memory?’ And two of them immediately pointed to the third person in the room. And I asked that person to leave. It was very convincing that they pointed to this third person. So then we're left with a guy, a man and a woman. And so then I took out my little package for two people and I placed it. I just placed this pile of sentences in front of each one. They were sitting at separate desks. And after about, I don't know, just thirty seconds to a minute of them looking at it, the woman became very anxious and agitated and, and she had to be taken from the room.” 
 I said, “What do you think was going on? She was just stressed by the responsibility?” 
 Jim said, “Yeah, totally. It was all up to the two of them. And if in fact, if I had lied to them or I had done something untoward, they would be blamed for it and they'd lose their jobs. So then I picked it up, I picked up my little dog and pony show and took it all away with me. And at that point, um, it was decided to give it in an envelope to Webster.” 
 SEEING KRYPTOS IN PERSON 
 I told Jim I am visiting KRYPTOS in the near future. I asked if I would get any advantage from actually seeing it in person – like the shapes or shadows?” 
 Jim said, “I can’t say.” 
 He added, “ I get that question once a week from people trying to crack it.” 
 
 2020-11-17 - AJ Jacobs 
 This transcript was exported on Nov 17, 2020 - view latest version here. 
 Hello everybody. Thank you again for your advice about my interview with Ed Scheidt. I talked to him last week. My impressions are 
 He is a very nice person! Very gracious. 
 His anwers did not seem overly helpful. They were kind of dense and discursive. Part of the problem is that I’m not enough of an expert in cryptography. And part of the problem is that he often speaks in abstract and vague language. Specifics were few and far between. 
 As for the big question about whether he’d solve K4, he said this: 
 He will not try to solve K4 because he likes not knowing the answer when he is talking to journalists or solvers. It means he doesn’t have to lie. He said that his experience in the CIA has taught him ignorance is sometimes the best course. 
 I am including the transcript. Again, I don’t think there’s a huge amount to be gleaned from it. But maybe those who are sharper than me can find a sliver. 
 If folks have further questions, I am happy to try to get him back on the phone. He seemed open to talking again. Just let me know. 
 Thanks! 
 This transcript was exported on Nov 17, 2020 - view latest version here. 
 AJ: Would you mind taking it from the start, how you got asked to be involved? 
 Ed Scheidt: Well as you may have read, I was an employee at one time of the CIA, and I was also reaching my retirement age and others knew that, so I was asked by the senior people if it was possible to create something that would be more on the commercial side just for defining things, because I worked in the world where you had terminology assets and all this other stuff. Of course the government is not interested in giving out how they talk to different people and so forth. So I said sure why not, and then the next step was for me an interesting step, and the step was, what would you envision, how hard ... because cryptography can come in different gradations of difficulty. And so I said how hard? And they said well don't make it too hard, T-O-O. And I said, well that's a subjective thing but that's all right too. So I left and came back and said well I have some suggestions and see what you think. In my travels and experiences and so forth I've come across different languages and things like this, if you are going to go a commercial type of thing and you want to give some opportunity for people to ... we'll use the term break the system or be able to hack inside into it, the choice of a language becomes important. 
 Ed Scheidt: And so I started with a language that was really only used in the world for about 100 years, that was defined a dead language today 
 AJ: Would you mind backing up for one second, you said a choice of a language... 
 Ed Scheidt: Yeah the choice was do I ... well I presented some choices and my choice was a language that was only used in the world for maybe 100 years or so. Then it was the community that used the language disappeared. I don't know the rest of the story but ... so that was one, and then I suggested well, I enjoy opportunities to teach cryptography and stuff like that, perhaps I could portray a educational aspect of it, and use some traditional cryptography that dates back to say 1700s I suppose, and up to modern usage. But this is a paper and pencil design, that what you see today which is the digital design, so the digital designs have inherent fundamentals, but don't exhibit the fundamentals like I was going to do and such. So I said that, and then I would suggest we used the English language as a reference. Now why becomes important in the discussion of, if you're going to give someone the opportunity to do analysis of your work, you wind up with what you may remember or hearing a reason that the Navajos were used during World War II is the United States didn't believe anyone had cataloged that particular language. 
 And if you don't catalog it that means before you get to the crypto part which is the math part, you still have to deal with the language. That was ... what was it written in? And to break Kryptos, the various aspects that had taken place, they used that fundamental principle. Now if we have more ease in the English language than any other letter. We have few Zs in the English language, therefore you wouldn't start your analysis based on Zs. So that's the principle, and from there you have an opportunity and the statistics can work with you if you take that approach, which people who are in the business of crypto-analysts, crypto-analytics definitely know this type of a principle. 
 So after discussion and so forth the agency people said well the intent is to have it so that the design could be broken in time. At that time it was looking at three to five years, that was a matter of genius as they say, and stuff like that. But I said well there's some tricks I can do as long as I can get permission to do it. I recognize where I'm sitting. 
 So then I retired, that left it so that they didn't have to pay me [inaudible 00:13:25] if I wasn't retired then I'd get my employee's money. And so I said okay I'm willing to do this free. So I didn't hardly get any money from it. So, that's the genesis of it. And that led into the, can you do an educational type of presentation while you are creating a secret? And one of your questions that you needed to ponder is, why does everybody have an interest in this 30 years later? 
 AJ: Great question. 
 Ed Scheidt: Yep, and so a lot of this genesis that I'm mentioning to you is just a stage for a while, because part of what has transparent is transparent is you have a secret. Surely the secret is discoverable and I want to be the discovery, because as you are writing a book, and you're looking to do it in a broad sense, at one time it was 3,000 people working on this. Not with me. So there's clubs if you talk to Elonka and so forth you know that there's various groups, clubs that have met. I have had one that could do it, I did for a bunch of years, once a year in October invited people who had interest in Kryptos, we would go to a restaurant for a while and then a couple of more at my house, because I can accommodate say 20 people, something like that. And it was not in a formal supper but sandwich and stuff like that. But it was very fascinating because you're in one sense an adversarial world because everybody wants to know answer and ... or if there's more than one answer. Why? Because you can get very rich on this particular one. 
 At one time, and I do not keep up with this at all, but I was told that this particular puzzle has a genre in puzzles of the world, so it says if you broke that, ergo which drives the Elonka of the world, it's part of our credence too. 
 AJ: It's always listed in the lists of great unsolved puzzles, it's always up there with the Voynich manuscript. 
 Ed Scheidt: Well you also have other facets. One is, and this was part of the discussion before I was retiring. Are you going to keep a secret because of where the puzzle is located? It's in a courtyard of the CIA. The average person is not going to get in to see it. So it means are you willing agency to publish it, to illustrate it, to what extent you're going to want to talk about it? Because they use it also, or as I understand it, like a public relations. At one time I wrote the ... they used to have on the ... for recruitment, some CIA puzzles, totally separate of Kryptos, that was the person who put it together, for a presentation on the internet, and it was [inaudible 00:17:42] or whatever. Again it was to attract the younger folks who maybe have math backgrounds, or maybe are interested in being in analysis and stuff like that. So it's been used for the own internal way of saying, we have capabilities and here's an example of where it used as such. 
 AJ: Now when I talked to Jim he mentioned that you two would meet at a restaurant near the headquarters and talk in a low hushed voices. 
 Ed Scheidt: You know when we discovered, now you're moving into the actual production, if you want to call it the phase or work, you're going to put things together and so forth. Originally Jim thought that he could do the work and I could visit, he has a workspace in Maryland that he had used and [inaudible 00:19:11] media like yourself learned of that. Even though the quest is to keep things as secret, there are no real secrets in this world, and if you're a citizen. So I suggested to Jim why don't we do some techniques that could be used for the clandestine side of it, because it ties to the subject matter. So he agreed and that's where you lined up with restaurants, visited my house on occasion. Not that it's a clandestine site but it's not advertised as such, where his commercial site was advertised. So that worked out well, the concern was for audio, mostly for audio as opposed to seeing you at a place or something like that. And as you know the media has audio capabilities and pick up voices from a distance. So you could be in a facility and they could still hear you, or what's going on. 
 The obvious is, well not necessarily obvious but the goal was to findout what was the secret, how did you approach the subject of the content part? Which we have a process, we have all the inner changes that build to that, and now we move into if you are going to portray something in the CIA, [inaudible 00:21:17] do, what are the specifics that have ... and at the same time you have the gunmen who would like to retain as much confidentiality up to the point of when they announce it and show you and stuff like that. So this went on for several months. And you're limited on what you can do, it's just like I'm being interviewed by ABC News many many years ago, 20 years ago or so, and they told me, well Ed, this is going to be an experience for you because it's in real time. Which means whatever you say, and at that time 25 years ago they didn't have the delay capability that you get today.. 
 I said, and then ABC visited me at my house as sort of a formality, and said okay we're going to ask you these questions and lead me on in the interview to what you want, while they had certain things they wanted. And I answered them and stuff like that, and the punchline was, I get all wired up, I'm ready to start the interview in the sense of this is live on the ABC set in DC, so it's like a live set. Then I hear New York because it's New York feed, which is where the journalist was at the time. Well he introduced himself and stuff like that, and then in the background came… say, Ed everything we talk about this weekend forget because I'm not going to ask you these questions, I'm going to ask you what you would like to hear. Now think about that, you're live there, 20 million people around the world, you know ABC is big, and it's like the New York Times, a lot of people read it, and a lot of people hear. And I said, well okay this is an interesting experience. So went through that, the good news is, people after it, they said well Ed you had your three minutes. 
 AJ: So I think Jim had said, just like me, he was no expert in cryptography, and that you gave him a crash course. So what were some of the things you taught him. 
 Ed Scheidt: He learned enough because I did the education as part of his result type of thing, in other words, we're going to come with an answer, let me show you how the answer. And then while we are doing that, let's talk about why did we choose this way of doing it, that's the education part. In other words I could sit here and say well, we're going to do substitution in the genre of cryptography, and you look at me and say, okay. That 25 cents gets me a cup of coffee. And that was ... it has no meaning. Where if I could say we're going to make a puzzle that you would like to have, and while we're making that puzzle let's introduce cryptography into the puzzle and then I will give you some reasons of why this was chosen to do it that way. And so that's some of the education side at Jim's level. Now in the overall project I looked at the way ... has taken place in modern cryptography, not digital now, but paper and pencil. Modern cryptography, what are the bases that make it up? 
 And there you are looking at mathematically how can you make something that will create a secret? Well that's the simple or broad way of addressing this. And then from there on, I said well let's use examples as well as create the puzzle. In other words, if the puzzle is only to be out there three to five years, then we can deal with that in the context of known, understand academic level of cryptography. And there you wind up with, in the genre substitution is the name that flies, you're going to substitute something for something else, since we're using the English language. You're going to substitute one letter for another letter, and what makes you substitute is part of the math of cryptography. So we began with that, substitutions if you want to read a little bit about this, you'll find that that dates back a lot of time, in other words you take the alphabet and you just move it down one character or two characters and then you starts combining the functions. And then you wind up with processes or process of encryption that is acceptable in the paper and pencil which was done in the 17th century. 
 And well understood again a mathematical problem that's been used for puzzles for many many years, well hundreds of years. So to take these various principles, in other words are we going to make something that AJ would understand, Jim has never been exposed to cryptography but yet I've got to teach him, but at the same time, you don't care. Two weeks after you've done this it's gone, it's not coming back, that's not his thing. So you've got to make something that's retainable, that you can write it on a piece of paper because that's what I did, and it can be justified by others that it's not stupid, and it has credence and so on. But it meets some criteria. So substitution was one I had to use, another math problem is transposition, transposition is again the name implies, you're transposing something. So instead of a direct correlation that you can visualize, transposition is a little harder to visualize. It's sort of like looking at a puzzle and you're defining the parameters of the puzzle in the sense of the square, and then now you have the square and you're going to transpose the characters or the letters that are in the square to something that's a secret. 
 So my secret is push into this square. So that was another step. And then the last step which has been good for 30 years, which I didn't know at the time it would be, but I masked the framework, in other words if you can change the language base then it becomes in my favor and not your favor of trying to break it. It becomes more of a challenge now, when it was used as the mask it was current, 2020 secret. 
 AJ: As I mentioned, I am a beginner in cryptography so what does that mean to change the language base? And can you tell me more about masking? 
 Ed Scheidt: Well mask ... mask is that have used the English to write not a problem. In other words here's what I want to keep secret, I write it in English. If I use that directly in the puzzle I have against me the number of Es, the number of Ys and number Xs and so forth [I wrote. Now if I can mask that, change that characteristic, then you as a breaker of the system whatever it is, different views of what you're looking at. You are either the maker of the system, like Sanborn, or you're the breaker of the system, which is the majority of the community of the world who would like to know what does that puzzle say? And is a puzzle inside of a puzzle? Because it can be that too. And so my son works for NBC and he talks to me about it, because I'll say that I had some talks or an interview of something like that. And he's heard the subject for 30 years but he's not the math of the family. That's just how we are, but he enjoys listening to the stories that have come out of this thing. 
 AJ: Oh yeah well they wanted me to come and see it, but because of COVID that's delayed, so hopefully I'll go get to see it soon. 
 Ed Scheidt: Either get yourself somewhat familiar because it's a sculpture, and looking at a sculpture by itself without a context it's not as much fun as ... if you look at this way, and there's other things that have been put out on the compound of the CIA in addition to the sculpture itself, and there's a been a lot of interest over the years, potential meanings of all these things. 
 AJ: Yeah, can I ask again about the masking. How do you crack a masked code? 
 Ed Scheidt: That's for me to know and for you to find out. 
 AJ: Good one, but in general, not this one, but is there a key word or a key phrase or is it ... 
 Ed Scheidt: No clues. 
 AJ: No clues, all right. Well I'm not asking, I still am not sure what changing the language base means. Like you're not changing it to a different language like French or German, you're changing it to a ... 
 Ed Scheidt: Something. 
 AJ: What's that? 
 Ed Scheidt: Something else. 
 AJ: What's that? 
 Ed Scheidt: Not to another language, it's to something else. 
 AJ: 
 Oh, so it could be to something else like something in world like the window pattern across that I'm looking at right now, that kind of thing? 
 Ed Scheidt: It could be, but it's not. 
 AJ: It's not the window pattern outside my window? 
 Ed Scheidt: No, sorry. 
 AJ: Well I thought I had cracked it. 
 Ed Scheidt: That's the currency. You asked about what keeps people going. It's a puzzle, and if you figure out the mechanics of how you did it, then it gives a insight into the answer. 
 AJ: 
 Right, well I Google searched to see what are the hardest types of encryption, and people talk about the One Time Pad, so is that a different thing from masking, or is that related to masking? 
 Ed Scheidt: It's not directly related but because you're trying to say, did you use a one time pad per se, that's not the intent. The analogy is reasonable, but reasonable in a sense of the result. How you did it to get that result is the question. 
 AJ: Got it, and the other thing Jim mentioned was interesting, he said that you told him about codes that are woven into African blankets 
 Ed Scheidt: Clothes that have part ties and other apparel, things like that. And I had a very interesting career, part of a career. Because how you portray the result is another story in itself. In other words, I've got a fancy code, but I have to be able to use it as such. And how I'm going to use it is another subject that enters into the puzzle as such. Because if I want to say I can put it in a blanket, okay, that means I carry the blanket with me. It means I can go across borders with that blanket, and that can happen depending on your business opportunity, it has a meaning to you, or a meaning to a person. So it puts you into the use of these devices, and it lets you write books. Not necessarily in the context of what you're writing, but the war stories and all the other things. Because you're there, you're experiencing the result of doing this, if you are wanting to be able to have you talk in a different country to me how do you do that? Because if you are determined that you're talking to me, you die.And therefore it's taken seriously, as opposed to casual. 
 AJ: Yep, the stakes are high. 
 Ed Scheidt: 
 Yeah the stakes are high, can be, and they're stories. Thousands of stories along those lines. 
 AJ: So have you thought of writing a book yourself? 
 Ed Scheidt: 
 I did but I had too many other things going on. I don't know if youever heard of digital currency? 
 AJ: Sure. 
 Ed Scheidt: 
 Well I'm heading up the security of digital currency for all of ISO, I don't know if you know what ISO is? International Standards. 
 AJ: Right, I saw that. You are ahead of the curve on that one. 
 Ed Scheidt: Cryptography is only a part of it. 
 AJ: 
 Right, but a huge part of it. One thing I wasn't clear on, did you know the answers to K1, K2 and K3? Or did you crack them or learn them when they were solved? 
 Ed Scheidt: 
 I learned them when it solved. How I work with people is, I firstly do not want to know and if the arrangement is I show you how to do it, you do it, now if you make a mistake in doing it, I'm not here to correct you. I can be I mean obviously I've been asked to review things. But in the case of Kryptos I tried to stay ... okay Jim you have the secret, you have the puzzle, and therefore when I get all these wonderful interviews, I don't have to lie to people. 
 AJ: Ah, I was wondering why, aren't you curious to try to solve K4? 
 Ed Scheidt: 
 I've also learned in my experiences in years past with the government and all, it doesn't do you any good to be too curious. And in the case of ... I just shared the story with the real time, I'm trying to ... this sounds bad but I'm trying to vie my wits with a correspondent that could be much more smarter than I. In his head the ability to ask those tricky questions, and if you've got cameras there focusing on you as you're asking those tricky questions, you can determine he's lying, or he knows something that he's not sharing. Which is, in this case, is [inaudible 00:44:36] things. And then when I have like I said shared with you, you have a supper with a dozen, two dozen people and they're all looking at you, and they all have had a chance at home or otherwise to come up with questions, just like you focused on the mask. They ask six questions upon that. You're seeing that I have a high IQ too, so anyhow. And it's not wrong, it's just okay I'm not a person that likes to lie. 
 AJ: 
 So ignorance is the best defense. You can't be caught lying if you don't know it 
 Ed Scheidt: If I don't know it, I can't make a mistake 
 AJ: 
 I asked a couple of people I know in the Kryptos community if they had any questions for you, so can I ask you just a couple of those? 
 They wanted to know, was the book that you gave Jim, was that the Cryptanalysis by Helen Gaines? 
 Ed Scheidt: No, I don't think it was, I don't remember that but I don't believe it was. 
 AJ: Do you remember what book you gave him or what materials? 
 Ed Scheidt: It was many years ago. 
 AJ: How about this question, are you ready? This is one of my favorites. Can you arrange a meeting at the Tiger's Den at 7.30 am? 
 Ed Scheidt: 
 I don't think the Tiger's Den is around any more. But there was such a place, at least as I remember it years ago, that you could do that. 
 AJ: It was a restaurant? I have no idea what it means, he just asked me to ask you. 
 Ed Scheidt: 
 Yeah, if I remember right, it's years ago, it was like restaurant. And it was just a gathering place, and it was a gathering place for people who had interests in Kryptos and wanted to talk about it. You have a transformation of being able to gather information, now you have world wide internets and stuff like that, so you can reach anybody almost anywhere so gathering the areas is one thing. The other is there's enough [inaudible 00:47:46] type of things that the internet is not thoroughly secret either, and because of that it's not as if you can get it in a social environment, like I said have a lunch or a drink or something like that. And then talk on the subject and as well as, what you didn't ask them is, what in their question does it include a secret that's related to them? Because it's a strange world that we live in, in other words Kryptos has secret, does AJ have a secret? That he would like to keep relating to Kryptos? Because the carrot is there, is if you could gain for instance [inaudible 00:48:47] your discussion or [inaudible 00:48:49] today, if you could gain how the fourth part what makes it up, or what's the direction and stuff like that. That's worth money to you, and it's worth fame to you, [inaudible 00:49:08] you may not have recognized it. 
 Because it is a hard puzzle, and today. That wasn't it's intention 30 years ago. But because when you are making things in the world of cryptography, or you're doing a lot of things in math, the math parameters shift on you, because you have some very smart PhDs out there that can outdo their analysis from a math perspective, and say hey if we did this mathematically would that make a difference? Now you blend that into the principles that go with the math of cryptography, now you're trying to say well where's the clues? And I mentioned substitution, there are clues in substitution, process that allows you mathematically to address the problem without knowing cryptography per se. It's a math problem. So if you can do that and then you get into a lot of other things, what they call linear and nonlinear math. Linear is a direct substitution, non-linear is a quadratic way of looking at it. What it all amounts to is it's more difficult as you're getting into the math of the cryptography. What I was trying to present, or which was presented is the different steps of looking at this puzzle in mathematics and the basis of languages. That's if you're going to keep it as a pencil and paper system. In today's genre for cryptography no one thinks of it, I mean literally no one thinks of it in the basic cryptographic education type of scenario, that's not the same. You're into the world of algorithms, which is again another step in the math process. So it evolves, it can evolve as a puzzle, it can be used in any one of the steps, it can be used as a basis of your puzzle. Which it was, you've got K1, two, three, which is steps of the puzzle, and then K4 being the final 
 AJ: I think this person thought that that phrase, can you meet at the Tiger's Den at 7.30 am might have something to do with the 
 Ed Scheidt: 
 Yeah, well the error is looking at the key which is another acronym used in cryptography to say, if there is a secret method would that method show in a key as the name implies, which opens the lock? 
 AJ: Right. 
 Ed Scheidt: 
 It can be looked at in that context. Whereas the context has important facet of how you address these questions. It took a different context than the person who you're talking to. 
 AJ: 
 Another question was, did you work on any other puzzles that were outside of the CIA before you worked with Jim? Or was that the first time you were consulted? 
 Ed Scheidt: That was the first time I was consulted. 
 AJ: All right do you have questions for me? 
 Ed Scheidt: No, I would like to read your book though when it comes out. 
 