[[page 1]]
   The basic cryptographic discovery that I’ve made is a 
simple substitution code that I’ve been calling “Shadow 
Morse”.  We know that Sanborn has said that one of his 
artistic themes is light and shadow, and the word SHADOW is 
right there in the Morse. 
 
   To form Shadow Morse, simply change every dit to a dah, 
and every dah to a dit.  This forms the table in the upper 
right hand corner of my worksheet.  Since correspondences 
are two-way or reflective, I only wrote each letter once 
rather than writing the complete alphabet in the left 
column. 
 
   Next, convert every K0 Morse segment into its 
corresponding shadow equivalent.  Sanborn has made 
statements that the alignment or orientation of certain 
letters in Kryptos is important and this is true of the 
Morse just as much as it is of the courtyard sculpture.  
Since 5 of the 7 segments consist of 2 lines of Morse and 
some Morse letters are longer than others, writing these 
out on graph paper or in a monospace font gives an 
inadequate representation of those alignments.  I did make 
some attempt on my worksheet to indicate those alignments, 
but it does a pretty crappy job of it.  I’d urge you to 
look at Jim Gillogly’s pics of the Morse (or any other pics 
of it that you have) to get a better view of those 
alignments. 
 
   I believe that the shadow morse translation contains 
many references to the courtyard sculpture.  Some of these 
ideas are speculative, but I’ll lay out what I believe I’ve 
identified. 
 
SOS : I believe that OSO is a reference to the visual 
nature of the courtyard sculpture when viewed from above.  
One of the themes of Kryptos is the progression of 
cryptography from linear, 1D codes (such as Morse), to 2D 
codes such as Vigenere or Quagmire, to (perhaps?) spatial 
forms of encoding.  So, traveling into the 3rd dimension to 
get a view of Kryptos from above, we can see that the 
copperplate forms an S and the pool beneath the tableau 
side is one of the O’s.  (Since making this observation, 
I’ve wondered if there’s anything in particular in the 
corresponding area bounded by the CT side.  Did you notice 
anything there when you visited the courtyard?) 
 

[[page 2]]
RQ:  Several of the shadow morse sequences refer to 
specific lines of the copperplate, I believe.  KF in this 
case seems to refer to the 10th line of the CT side, which 
ends in KF.  The PT of this line contains the reference to 
WW, and I believe this is a major hint to focus on doubled 
letters as we work through the steps of solving K4.  (I 
have other evidence supporting this belief which I’ll keep 
under my hat for now.) 
 
LUCIDEEE 
MEMORYE: The shadow morse equivalent of LUCIDEEE doesn’t 
have any meaning that I’ve been able to discover, but the 
untranslated reading of it definitely does.  More on that 
later.  In addition, I believe there are some stego 
messages found by reading the engraved dits and dahs (not 
the shadow dits and dahs) of LUCID (dropping the 3 “spacer” 
E’s) in reverse, or from east to west.  My friend Eric 
Harshbarger once created a puzzle based on non-delimited 
morse and wrote an app to help solve such sequences 
(http://www.ericharshbarger.org/epp/2010/unmorser.html), so 
that helped in finding these messages, since non-delimited 
morse can be parsed in a huge number of ways.  One of the 
messages I believe was intended is EAST WEST E.  There’s 
one more that I won’t disclose for now, and there may be 
others that I haven’t noticed yet. BTW, on the subject of 
those “spacer” E’s, I believe I have some idea of the 
significance of most of those.  This has probably been 
noted by some folks in the Kryptos Group before, so I can’t 
claim it as my own discovery.  For this morse segment, I 
believe the 3 dots after LUCID and the 1 dot after MEMORY 
refer to the 31 columns of the tableau side and of Jim’s 
worksheets and the fact that all of the lines of K4 on the 
sculpture have 31 characters, unlike the varying numbers of 
characters per line in all the other sections. 
 
T IS YOUR 
POSITION: My worksheet doesn’t do an adequate job of 
capturing the alignment of these letters, but I believe 
they form a “word picture” that roughly translates to “X 
some KGB moles”.  In addition, interpreting the T IS YOUR 
line (as engraved, not the shadowed version) as a non-
delimited string from east to west can produce the message 
END MORSE T, which I believe is another stego message. 
 
DIG(E)TALEEE 
INTERPRETATIT: I believe this is a reference to another 
specific line in the CT, this one being the 4th line of K3.  

[[page 3]]
I believe this line, in conjunction with other information 
and discoveries, leads to the key that gets us through the 
first doorway to the solution to K4.  I think the second 
line is another sort of “word picture” that I’d interpret 
as symbolizing the Cold War.  The K(ryptos) team is pulling 
in one direction, while the K-T(eam) enemy is pulling in 
the other.  In support of that reading, I’d note that the 
two halves of this shadow string read in opposite 
directions and the unshadowed equivalent of K is R.  When 
you reflect an R, you get the Cyrillic letter YA, which 
certainly has been noted in the Kryptos Group before. 
 
EEVIRTUALLY 
EEEEEEINVISIBLE : The significant features of this one are 
the doubled letters (YY), and the 2 spacers/6 spacers 
referring to the 26 letters of the alphabet. Also, the fact 
that E INVISIBLE is a palindromic sequence has been noted 
before.  Perhaps the shadow reading of this one is also 
Jim’s way of saying “Hi MOM” (LOL). 
 
EESHADOWEE 
FORCESEEEEE: Note that the unshadowed morse reading of this 
one begins with the word SEE reading from east to west, and 
directly below that in the shadow reading we get a Q.  I 
believe this is a reference to the ending of K3 “X can you 
see anything Q”.  With regard to the spacers, I interpret 
the 2 and the 5 as referring to a 5-digit binary number 
which can have a value up to 31, which we already know is a 
significant number.  In addition, I just noted during the 
process of typing up these notes that FORCES contains a CES 
corresponding to the misspelling PALIMPCEST, so I applied 
that to the shadow translations of PALIMPCEST and ABSCISSA 
as shown.  Since I just discovered that, I’ll have to 
explore its significance as I try to make my way through 
further doorways. 
 
