Jim Sanborn interview with NPR's Mary Louise Kelly
All Things Considered
22 Nov 2010, 4 min 23 seconds
http://www.npr.org/2010/11/22/131520768/-kryptos-sculptor-drops-new-clue-in-20-year-mystery

Unofficial transcription by Jim Gillogly

NPR: For the first time in 20 years a new clue has been dangled to
the mystery that is Kryptos.  If you're a would-be codebreaker that
probably means you were up all night last night trying to solve Kryptos.
If, on the other hand, you have absolutely no idea what I'm talking about,
here's a quick primer.  Two decades ago the CIA commissioned a sculpture
to grace one of the courtyards at its headquarters in Langley, Virginia.
The sculptor who won the commission was a man named Jim Sanborn, and he
designed a curving copper wall with a secret code embedded across four
panels.  Codebreakers eventually cracked the first three, but that fourth
panel continues to stump even the pros at the CIA and the National
Security Agency.  So, in the New York Times yesterday the Sculptor, Jim
Sanborn, dropped a clue.  Well, he's with me now in the studio, and, Jim
Sanborn, tell me if I've got this right: the final passage, the fourth
passage, is 97 characters, the clue that you dropped yesterday was what
six of those characters are.  And you said it's the word or the city BERLIN,
B E R L I N, so now we know BERLIN, the challenge is solving what the other
91 characters are, has anybody come close yet, since this clue came out yesterday?

JS: Well, so far we have just under a thousand attempts on cracking the code...

NPR: Since yesterday.

JS: Since yesterday, most of them frivolous, but that's to be expected.

NPR: Anybody close?

JS: Well, not yet.  The thing about it is, these people send you a code crack
and they really don't ... they don't want to give it to you, because they don't...
they think... First of all, they're not sure that they're speaking to Jim Sanborn.
And so I had to develop a system whereby I could test the calls and determine
whether they got the code without knowing what they said.

NPR: Wow, so layers of deception and sneakiness even in trying to solve it.

JS: Yeah, totally. I mean it's been a crazy ride, and some people have completely
changed their lives.  They've changed their businesses, they've changed their
homes, they've changed their relationships over Kryptos.  Amazing, but true,
but I'm trying to somehow narrow it so that we get on with it.

NPR: Jim Sanborn, I had the chance to interview you about Kryptos back
in 2005.  It had been 15 years since you'd completed the sculpture, and
nobody had made much progress on the fourth passage then, and you told
me back then that you're actually really terrible at keeping secrets.

JS: Absolutely.

NPR: Still are.

JS: Absolutely.

NPR: Now that you're dangling this clue, should we interpret this as
that you're maybe weakening, that you'd actually like somebody to solve
the darn thing already?

JS: OK, well I mean really, it's 6 characters out of 97.  And I dangled
the clue BERLIN, but I also divulged or gave images of my original decoding
charts, the ones that I... well actually for me they were encoding
charts.  And I think once the Kryptophiles study it in a forensic
manner there might be revelations in there.  So in a way I gave more
than just BERLIN, I think I gave other information as well.

NPR: Once this fourth passage is solved, if it is solved, you have said that
there's actually... that that's just the beginning, that there's a riddle
embedded across the entire sculpture.  Elaborate.

JS: Yeah, I mean there... it's a riddle within a riddle, and the final passage
will lead in several directions.  The word directions is... I use intentionally,
and, uh, that's it.  I mean, what can I... If I say any more, I... y'know,
perhaps give away too much.

NPR: That's it for now.

JS: That's it for now.

NPR: Well, Jim Sanborn, thanks very much.

JS: Thank you for having me.

NPR: That's the sculptor Jim Sanborn talking about his decision to
drop a clue to the mystery of the Kryptos sculpture at the CIA in
Langley, Virginia.
