There is leftover gibberish (or, was previously thought to be gibberish) in the form of a specific letter string "ETRANSEWJ", pertaining to the solved Pre-K. Specifically, and I am paraphrasing here, "Codes may be divided into 2 classes, substitional and transpositional, the latter being the most difficult to solve without the key ETRANSEWJ". I feel this was put into Pre-K to be used as a  validation test for determining whether anticipated keys had merit.

K4 provides the specific letters, to formulate ETRANSEWJ, and when transposed a certain way, provides ALL of the necessary cipher text to "build" the letter string from just 2 rows and 1 column. This makes the relationship between Pre-K and K4 more than just coincidence. The fact that all of the cipher text aligns neatly on one section of a matrix, rather than a random pattern, for someone to "cherry pick" the letters lends credibility to the intention of ETRANSEWJ being put into K4 for us to use!

Because we are given ETRANSEWJ in Pre-K, I assumed it could be tested on its own, against the Key, without having to find it by TRANSPOSITION. This is important, because it is used to help deconstruct the cipher text!!  I believe the mask being used is a complex set of TRANSPOSITIONS, set in motion by the clues found in K0, and the Key is validated using ETRANSEWJ from Pre-K.

Getting back to the transposed matrix, where ETRANSEWJ is built using the lower half of the transposed matrix, the cipher text for "berlin clock" uses the top of the transposed matrix. And, instead of  using 2 columns and 1 row, it uses, primarily, 1 row and 8 columns (I forget the exact number, but you can see my uploaded files for reference.)

Next, I ran a validation test of my Key, using ETRANSEWJ. I pretended that the clues "berlin clock" in spaces 64 to 74, were NEVER GIVEN. Starting from the first letter of the key, and testing the character string, methodically and in order, I was looking for plain text, which made complete sense. I discovered, starting at space 77, that using my Key's letters NINGUNSOL, the cipher text ETRANSEWJ decipered into the following plain text: "qletsflix"

Now, while K1, K2 & K3 are not required for solving K4, I did use plain text from the solved portions to answer concerns, which would have been brought up regarding the discovery of ANY key: (1) "q" has been seen many times, especially at the end of a question. (2) the second "L" in "flix" is most likely a misspelling, which we have seen many times before. (3) there are NO abbreviations, or anything which could be construed as something else. (4) this character string makes sense, is easy to read, and contains aspects already seen on numerous occasions throughout the solved portions of Kryptos. (5) anywhere else on the key, this character string produces pure gibberish. (6) I believe Sanborn put this into Pre-K ON PURPOSE, to be used as a stand alone test string to test the validity of any keys, which required testing!!

Finally, let's look at the LOGIC behind the specific clues given by Sanborn. The character string "qletsflix" starting at space 77 is VERY INTERESTING considering the clues we were given. Think about it; "berlin clock"_ _ "qletsflix"...
Why would Sanborn give us these specific clues, especially, considering he had 86 to 87 other spaces with which to offer clues?? Think about what's logically going on here. A question about a perhaps a broken clock, then a possible repair. THAT coupling of words makes LOGICAL SENSE!!! Since, I believe, that Scheidt and Sanborn put a validation key into Pre-K to test possible keys, then why not offer a clue, which when put into context, would offer even MORE PROOF of validity??

I believe that this effort substantially moves K4 towards being solved, by providing THE Key REQUIRED to convert the cipher text to plain text, and plain text to the cipher text. I also believe that ETRANSEWJ was put into Pre-K as a means of validating THE Key, and to give confidence to those solving K4 that they were on the right track!!! It is my belief that ETRANSEWJ helps to deconstruct the cipher text, and it's contextual  location is the reason why the 2010 and 2014 clues were given by Sanborn!!!