[[page 1]]
Coupla things.
1. I remember when that member ﬁrst mentioned the word HEADER that 
shows vertically in K3 CT. I didn't ﬁnd anything when I ﬁrst looked at 
it, mostly because of the word's orientation and nothing obvious nearby 
that would indicate a rotation or something. When he brought it up the 
second time, I looked again and didn't see anything again, but he 
mentioned that the H was the same H between YA and R in DYAHR. That 
made me look harder and I found that the HEADER string does describe 
the left fold in Sanborn's note sheet number 3. Funny how one's mind 
can settle on an idea and not see the obvious.
2. I responded to the recent posting about DYAHR. The reason I did this 
was to show the group the relationship between DIAWI and DYAHR via the 
obvious relationship with HYDRA. I showed the relationships as:
HYDRA = 12345 - DYAHR 32514
WIDIA = 12345 - DIAWI 32514.
As I proofread my response, I noticed also that:
DIAWI = 12345 - DWAII 14325 (14325 is KRYPTOS without Y=7 and T=6, the 
two letters adjacent to the center letter, P).
DWAII is the "nuance" version of DIAWI that shows up in positions 31 to 
35 in the 16 shift version of K4 (+Z) CT. Now, I already recognized 
that the nuance versions of DIAWI, INFBN and NSKGS all had the 
positions of their second and fourth letters reversed. But, this second 
method of generating the nuance versions is new to me. This means that 
the NUANCE OF IQLUSION is related to DYAHR and, ultimately, HYDRA!! Am 
I stretching the limits of association? Maybe.
This deﬁnitely deserves a deeper look.
Before going too deeply into this, we take note of the seemingly 
related facts that:
1. The nuance versions of DIAWI, INFBN and NSKGS all have the letters 
adjacent to the middle letter reversed, generating DWAII, IBFNN and 
NGKSS as the nuanced versions.
2. The relationship of DIAWI = 12345 with DWAII = 14325 shows that the 
nuance version DWAII has the order 14325, which is the same order as 
KRYPTOS = 1473625, but with the numbers adjacent to the middle number, 
3, missing. 
HYDRAvsDYAHRvsWIDIAvsDIAWIvsDWAII
Paul Kiesel
11/22/2023
Page 1

[[page 2]]
This combination of facts implies that there is a relationship involving 
the two letters adjacent to the center letter of subject strings.
Several things to check in chasing this down occur to me. The most 
obvious are to try changing the keyword KRYPTOS to:
1. KRPOS
2. KRTPYOS
and modifying the tableau to have those options replace KRYPTOS as the 
alphabet keyword, then run known matrices using those modiﬁed tableaux.
I tried running the above strings as alphabet keys using K4 CT as 
ciphertext (because JS has been pushing lately that the solution has 97 
letters). I came across nothing that really stood out, though I have to 
admit that there were more options to try. But...
I came to the conclusion that the probability exists that the 
relationships described regarding the strings I mentioned on page 1 lead 
the solver to recognize the form arrived at (DWAII) by modifying the 
DIAWI that appears after the word KLU in K4 CT, the conclusion being 
that the position occupied by DWAII in the 16-shift version of K4 CT and 
it’s modiﬁed appearance with the double letters at the end, points to 
the similarly constructed NGKSS that lies in that same position in K4 
CT. Analysis involving the three strings mentioned on page 1 shows that 
all three of the strings, whether in original form or in modiﬁed form, 
occupy only the same three positions in the texts, regardless of the 
caesar shifts involved. The version of NGKSS that appears in K4 CT 
amounts to the NUANCED version of the original version which appears in 
the 10-shift version of K4 in the same position as DIAWI does in the 
zero-shift version. This 10-shift version is the one we use in moving 
forward in K4 after we insert the Z in front.
So, the DWAII form is another clue to get to the 10-shift version of K4. 
In my work, I used the fact that DIAWI, besides being in the original 
form of K4, also exists in the same form in the 21-shift version. After 
studying the three strings found in two versions of the shifted text, I 
looked harder and found DWAII, which lead to ﬁnding IBFNN and NGKSS. I 
ﬁnally deduced that the version of NSKGS I needed was the one where 
NSKGS appears in the same positions as DIAWI does in the zero-shift 
version of K4.
So, there are two ways at least leading to the 10-shift version of K4. 
Kryptos has numerous instances of multiple clues to reach conclusions 
about things.
That is the long way of explaining my conclusion re DIAWI and DWAII via 
WIDIA and DYAHR.
Page 2
